Document Title: A Guide To Outdoor Living And Wilderness Survival.txt



--- Page 1 ---
Document Title: A Guide To Outdoor Living And
Wilderness Survival.pdf
--- Page 1 ---
--- Page 2 ---
THE COMPLETE
OUTDOORSMAN'S
HANDBOOK
A Guide to Outdoor Living and Wilderness Survival
JEROME J. KNAP
L Ll
PAGURIAN PRESS LIMITED
-A
Copyright @ 1976 Pagurian Press Limited
Suite 603, 335 Bay Street, Toronto, Canada
A Christopher Ondaatje publication. Copyright under
the Berne Convention. All rights reserved. No part 
of this book may be reproduced in any form without
the permission of the publishers.
Distributed in the United States of America and
internationally by:
PUBLISHERS MARKETING GROUP A BAKER & TAYLOR COMPANY
Executive Offices
1515 Broadway
New York, N.Y. 10036
Distribution Center
Gladiola Avenue Momence, Illinois 60954
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 74-79519
ISBN 0-919364-62-4
Printed and Bound in the United States of America.
OTHER BOOKS BY JEROME J. KNAP
--- Page 3 ---
The Hunter's Handbook
101 Tips to Improve Your Fishing


--- Page 2 ---
Training the Versatile Gun Dog (with Alyson Knap)
Getting Hooked on Fishing (with David Richey)
Where to Fish and Hunt in North America
The Family Camping Handbook
A Complete Guide to Canoeing (with Carl Monk)
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND PICTURE CREDITS
My most sincere thanks to E. B. Sanders for his many
fine pen-and-ink sketches which illustrate this 
book.
Thanks are also due to the following persons and
organizations for the use of photographs: Arkansas 
Fish and Game Commission (page 158); Bausch and Lomb
Incorporated (page 66), Buck Knives 
Incorporated (pages 68 and 77) ~ Bushnell Optical
Incorporated (page 64); Canadian Government 
Travel Bureau (page 28) Gerry/Outdoor Sports
Industries Incorporated (pages 31 and 99); Jerome
Knap 
(pages 54 and 80); E. Leitz Incorporated (pages 60
and 65); McCulloch Corporation (page 86), Normark 
Corporation (page 75 and 152) ; Ontario Ministry of
Industry and Tourism (pages 82, 103, 107, 135, 138 
and 142) ; Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources
(pages 120 and 131) ; Outboard Marine Corporation 
(page 147); Pennsylvania Game Commission (pages 34
and 32); RU-KO of Canada Limited (page 73).
Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND PICTURE CREDITS     vi
INTRODUCTION
1. UNDERSTANDING THE OUT-OF-DOORS
2. OUTDOOR KNOW-HOW
        Training Your Senses, Sounds and Smells:
Interpreting Ani
        mal Actions
3- WILDLIFE HAZARDS
        Bears: Other Wildlife, Rabies, Dequilling a
Dog; Wildlife on
        Highways, Snakes: Treating a Snake Bite-,
Other Reptiles
4- BEATING THE BUGS


--- Page 3 ---
        Wasps, Hornets, and Bees: Scorpions and
Spiders: Mosquitos
        and Blackflies; Horseflies and Deerflies-,
Chiggers and Itch
        Mites: Ticks, Caterpillars; Coping with
Itching Bites
5- POISONOUS PLANTS
        Poison Ivy: Poison Sumac; Poison Oak;
Stinging Nettle
--- Page 4 ---
6- MAP AND COMPASS
Choosing a Compass, Using Map and Compass; Wilderness
        Maps
7. OPTICS FOR THE OUTDOORSMAN.
        Binocular Savvy; Selecting Binoculars: Other
Optics
8- THE OUTDOORSMAN'S KNIFE
        Which Knife for What? How Many Knives? Knife
Care;
        Sharpening a Knife
9. THE ART OF AXMANSHIP
        Choosing an Ax; Cutting with an Ax
10. CHAIN SAW TACTICS
        Choosing a Chain Saw Cutting Techniques:
Chain Saw
        Safety
11. CAMPFIRE MYSTIQUE
     Campfire Woods; The Hardwoods or Deciduous
Trees; The
Softwoods or Conifers; Fireplaces
12. THE ABC'S OF CANOEING       
        Choosing a Canoe, Choosing a Paddle Loading,
Launching,
        and Landing; Paddling a Canoe
13. ARCHERY FOR THE OUTDOORSMAN         
        The Bow; The Arrow; Accessories
14. SNOWSHOES AND SNOWSHOEING   
        Selecting Snowshoes-, Snowshoe Construction,


--- Page 4 ---
What to Look
        For; Harnesses; Footwear; Outer Garments;
Other Equip
        ment, Tips on Travel; Snowshoeing Hazards
15. THE ABC'S OF SKI TOURING
        Equipment; Techniques; Waxing Cross-Country
Skis
16. THE BASICS OF SNOWMOBILING
        Driving a Snowmobile; Be Well Equipped; Be
Properly
        Dressed; Snowmobile Safety
17. GIVE THE COOK A CHANCE 
      Taking Care of Your Catch; Taking Care of Wild
Meat-,
Dressing Big Game; Skinning Big Game; Equipment;
Dress
ing Small Game; Game Birds, Dressing Game Birds;
Skinning
Game Birds; Plucking Game Birds
18. THE ABC'S OF WILDERNESS SURVIVAL    
The Seven Deadly Enemies; To Stay or To Walk Out?
Shelters; Fire; Signals; Ground to Air Signals; 
Food and Water; Edible Plants, Wildlife; Cooking and
Preserving Meat:
Survival Kits', File a Flight Plan
--- Page 5 ---
19. THE OUTDOORSMAN'S FIRST-AID KIT     
20. FIRST AID IN THE OUTDOORS   
General Rules, Accidents; Illnesses
Introduction
There is an outdoor recreation boom sweeping the
entire western world and this continent in
particular. 
There has been nothing like it in the past. Yes, the
out-of-doors has always had an appeal for some, but 
they have been a small minority. Two decades ago you
could go on a canoe trip in the summer months 
in the wilderness of Quetico and not see another soul


--- Page 5 ---
for an entire week. Not today. You are lucky if you 
see only three or four canoeing parties a day.
Arctic rivers that have not seen a white man's canoe
since the big fur-trading era, today are being 
traveled regularly. The old trails of the western
mountains, untrodden since the days of mountain men 
and early prospectors, are being hiked and backpacked
today. During the height of summer, camping 
areas in many parks are full. In the past, being a
fishing and hunting outfitter was a risky business.
It still 
is, but today many outfitters in the more popular
areas have no difficulty in attracting clientele.
This phenomenon is world-wide. In many of the
national parks of Africa, one can see a pride of
mini-
buses around every lion. I have even met a convoy of
two land rovers on safari in the middle of the 
Kalahari Desert in Botswana.
The reasons for this outdoor boom are many. A greater
interest in wildlife is one. Twenty years ago 
hunters and fishermen were the only large groups
interested in wildlife. Today, almost everyone has a 
casual interest in wild creatures. This interest is
not always tempered with wisdom, and is rarely 
accompanied by knowledge. At times wildlife
management agencies are hampered in their work by 
people who prefer to have deer starve than to have
them hunted by outdoorsmen.
Other reasons for the outdoor boom are more leisure
time, a more affluent society, and better highways 
and rapid transportation systems. Thirty years ago,
if a New York big-game hunter wanted to hunt in the 
Yukon, it took him five days just to reach
Whitehorse. Today, he is there in less than a day.
But I think 
that the biggest reason for the outdoor boom is a
spiritual rebellion against our sophisticated,
affluent 
society. Deep down we hunger for a quieter life, a


--- Page 6 ---
slower pace, green grass, and the sight of pale blue 
wood smoke curling up toward the sky. We want to "get
away from it all," but at times we bring it all 
with us in the form of tent cities and slums.
        Everyone who ventures into the out-of-doors
should possess the basic skills for outdoor living.
He 
should know how to make a good campfire, what types
of wood give fast heat for boiling tea, and what 
types provide hot flames for broiling steaks. He
should know how to paddle a canoe, how to forecast 
weather, how to use a compass, what the sudden cry of
a bluejay means, and what a bear is up to when 
he stands on his hind legs. The average outdoorsman
does not have to be a wilderness survival expert, 
but he should know the basics. After all, almost
everyone can become lost or lose his gear when his 
canoe is upset in a choppy wilderness lake.
        The outdoorsman should know all this and much
more. He should know about the natural world 
--- Page 6 ---
around him - how it lives and functions. He should
know its moods, its sounds, and its signals. But 
above all, the outdoorsman must have a code, an
outdoor ethic, to ensure that his life and travels in
the 
out-of-doors are in harmony with nature. Man, like
all creatures, is a user. This is how nature created 
him. Frequently our use leaves wounds. Every
campfire, every hiking trail, every fish caught, and
every 
grouse shot is a wound. But these are wounds that
nature heals and repairs with ease. An outdoorsman 
should never leave wounds that will permanently scar.
That is what the outdoor code and the outdoor 
ethic are all about.
Chapter I
Understanding the Out-of-Doors


--- Page 7 ---
A good outdoorsman is more than just a man who enjoys
the out-of-doors and possesses the necessary 
skills for an outdoor life. The ability to identify
that little brown bird on the dogwood branch and know
why crows mob on a hardwood ridge are not enough. To
be a good outdoorsman a man should know all 
this, but more important, he must understand how
nature around him functions.
Let us imagine that we are high on a ridge
overlooking a forested valley. It is apparent that
the forest is 
the dominant factor of all life in the valley.
Through the canopy of green, we can see the
occasional gray 
skeleton of a dead tree. As we walk through the
valley, we see the forest floor. In places nothing
but 
large trees grow. The floor is covered with leaves
from last autumn. In other places, where spots of
light 
penetrate the green blanket over our heads, seedlings
and saplings grow, their branches hungrily 
reaching toward the light. Here and there tree trunks
dot the forest floor, their bodies in various stages
of 
decay. Gray skeletons of a few dead trees still stand
upright.
Not all the dead trees are big and old. Trees seldom
die of old age. They die from competition. As a 
seedling sprouts, it immediately begins to compete
with other seedlings around it for light,
nourishment, 
and moisture. As it grows into a sapling, it competes
again against other saplings for the same essential 
elements. A tree lives as long as it has the strength
to endure the competition. It lives as long as it can
endure depredations from creatures of all kinds.
Insects feed on its tissues; rodents gnaw at its


--- Page 8 ---
bark; deer 
browse at its tips. A tree is also host to fungi and
bacteria. Creatures and organisms of all kinds use a 
tree for food and shelter.
The forest and the creatures that live in it are
woven together in an intricate web. Rodents that prey
on 
the tree are in turn preyed upon by foxes and owls.
Deer that browse the tree tips are preyed upon by 
wolves, and at times by men. Insects that feed on the
tree are preyed upon by birds. And birds that live 
among the branches of the tree scatter the seeds of
trees so that new trees will grow. When a calamity 
strikes a part of the forest, a portion of that web,
its impact reverberates throughout all the other
strands 
of the web.
In what is now a classical study of a forest
community, Dr. Arthur Williams conducted population 
research in a sixty-five acre beech and hard-maple
woodlot. The year the study began, the beeches and 
maples produced bumper crops of fruits, nuts, and
samaras. As a result, small mammals were 
exceedingly abundant in the area. The following
summer there was a drought and the crops of nuts and 
--- Page 7 ---
samaras failed. Insect hatches were poor as well.
The impact was catastrophic on the creatures of the
woodlot. Gray squirrels declined drastically in 
number. Many moved out. Chipmunks starved in the
winter because they could not store enough food to 
feed themselves. Their population crashed by ninety
percent. The shrews, which are insectivorous, could 
not find enough insects to feed on; hence they turned
to preying on forest mice. Under the onslaught of 
abnormally heavy predation, the mouse population
decreased by eighty percent. As the population of 
mice declined, the shrew population also dropped by


--- Page 9 ---
sixty-five percent. Why? They starved.
The failure of the nut and samara crop also had an
impact on the larger mammals. In the autumn, the 
woodlot held about forty cottontails. Two red foxes
and several skunks hunted there frequently. The next 
spring only two rabbits remained. The reason was the
lack of mice. The foxes were forced to spend more 
time hunting cottontails because mice, their usual
prey, were reduced to such low levels by the shrews. 
Skunks, which also prey on mice and on insects, left
the woodlot completely.
The following year the maples and beeches produced
normal crops of samaras and nuts. Mice, 
chipmunks, and squirrels increased to their usual
numbers. By autumn, there were over fifty rabbits in 
the woodlot. Why? During the year when the mice and
cottontails were reduced in numbers, no animals 
browsed and gnawed on the twigs and shoots of the
brush and the young maples and beeches. 
Everything grew in profusion. There was a
superabundance of food the following year, and the
rabbits 
multiplied.
There is no doubt that similar fluctuations occurred
among the birds - seed eaters, insect eaters, and
birds 
of prey. But since birds can move about much more
readily, they were less affected than the
cottontails, 
chipmunks, mice, and shrews, who are homebodies,
The forest and its creatures live together in an
intricate web. Each year some must die to nourish and
make room for others. spending their entire lives in
one small "home range".
Although the actions and interactions of the plants
and wildlife in this woodlot were under scientific 
scrutiny, any observant outdoorsman could have made
reasonably accurate deductions as to what was 
happening, the reasons for it, and what might happen


--- Page 10 ---
in the future. A good outdoorsman understands the 
outdoor world around him. Long before such biological
terms as ecology, habitat, eco-system, carrying 
capacity, annual turnover, and environment became
common usage, many old-time woodsmen knew 
about them. They did not know the words themselves,
indeed they would not have known what they 
meant, but they knew the happenings behind these
terms.
A decade or more ago towards the end of winter I
spent a few days with an old French-Canadian trapper.
When the talk turned to what kind of a season he had
had, he showed me a stack of two dozen lynx pelts.
"Been getting a few more every year for the past
eight or nine years," he said. "But this will be the
last 
good year for them cats. There ain't no rabbits any
more and these lynx were kind of poor. Some wasn't 
very big.
--- Page 8 ---
"It'll take the rabbits a few years to come back, and
then I'll start getting them cats again," he
continued.
The astuteness of his conversation struck me later. I
am sure that he never thought of his observations as 
being particularly noteworthy, but they were. He had
summarized not only the essence of a predator-
prey relationship, but also an understanding of the
complexity of the snowshoe hare-lynx cycle. He 
knew that as snowshoe hare populations increased in
their ten-year cycle, the number of lynx would also 
increase, but when the snowshoe hare cycle crashed to
its low point, the lynx population would also 
decline, but one year after the hares. The fact that
the cats were thin and that some, the young of that 
year, were somewhat smaller than normal showed that
they were undernourished,


--- Page 11 ---
Observations and deductions such as these can be made
by anyone who understands what is happening 
around him. A South Dakota pheasant hunter can get a
fairly good idea of the kind of fall pheasant 
season he can expect by remembering the severity of
the previous winter and the temperatures and 
rainfall of the spring that followed it. If the
winter had had deep snow, pheasants would have
survived 
only in the best of covers. This means that the
breeding population would be lower than average. If
the 
spring had been wet and cold, the size of hatches and
survival of pheasant chicks would be poor. Low 
breeding populations and poor hatches and poor
survival of chicks means low populations of pheasants
in the fall.
In mid-winter, with little snow, pheasants will
survive even in marginal covers. A high breeding 
population in the spring will result. If the spring
is favorable, good hatches and high chick survival
rates 
will result. A high breeding population, good
hatches, and good survival of chicks will mean a
bumper 
crop of ringnecks in the fall.
Every outdoorsman should understand the basic law of
nature the principle of carrying capacity. The 
tenets of this law can be seen on almost every
outing, even in a city park. If you want to see
certain 
species of wildlife, you go to places where they are
abundant. For example, if you want to see a white-
tailed deer, you go into a young forest with much
brush and sapling growth. The deer here have plenty 
of browse. Mature forests have low carrying capacity
for deer, because tender shoots and branches are 
too high for the deer to reach. On the other hand, if
you want to see wild turkey, you must go to mature 


--- Page 12 ---
forests because only mature forests bear mast for
turkeys to feed on.
The main reason why any species of animal is abundant
is because the habitat is suitable for its mode of 
life. In other words, the habitat has the capacity to
support that species - to give it food and shelter.
But 
there is more to it than that. The carrying capacity
of any habitat is limited. Just as a bridge with a 
warning sign "Eight-Ton Limit" has a limited carrying
capacity, so any given habitat has one as well.
For example, nearly every winter many of the northern
Great Lakes states report starvation among deer. 
This is simply the law of carrying capacity in
action. If there are too many deer for the habitat to
support, some of the deer must die. This carrying
capacity is not static. In a severe winter of deep
snows, 
the carrying capacity is decreased because the deer
herds will confine themselves to sheltered areas. 
Conversely, in mild winters, deer herds spread out
and thereby increase the carrying capacity of the 
--- Page 9 ---
forest. Their survival rate in mild winters is high.
Some years ago Missouri biologists carried out a
three-year study on bobwhite quail in two areas of
the 
same size holding about the same numbers of quail. In
one area all hunting was banned and conservation 
officers enforced the ban. In the other area hunting
was allowed during the normal quail season. At the 
end of every winter, the bobwhite populations in
these two areas proved to be the same. The law of 
carrying capacity was the reason for this. There was
no way that the quail could increase beyond the 
winter carrying capacity of their range. Nature would
not let them. In one way or another, the surplus 


--- Page 13 ---
quail were disposed of.
If a city park has a carrying capacity of fifty
robins, every spring you will find not more or less
than that 
number, regardless of the number of young robins that
were hatched the previous summer. In lakes, food 
is frequently the determining factor in carrying
capacity. With fish, carrying capacity can be
expressed 
in terms of pounds per acre. If a lake has sufficient
food for a thousand largemouth bass to grow to one 
pound, then twohundred bass would be able to grow to
five pounds each.
Carrying capacities of habitats increase and decrease
with time. Forest fires may be devastating when 
they are burning, but they bring benefits as well. We
have made a cult of Smokey the Bear, but in many 
cases this has been at the expense of wildlife. A
forest fire is only temporarily destructive. Any
moose-
hunting guide in northern Ontario will tell you that
the best moose hunting is on old bums, about twenty 
years after the fire. There is a lot of sapling
Trees live only as long as they can endure
competition from other trees and depredation from
bacteria, 
fungi, insects, and mammals. But even when a tree
dies, it decays and nourishes others.growth and feed 
for moose at that time. Indeed, as nature repairs the
damage by establishing young forests, a great 
variety and abundance of wildlife develop in the
early stages. Wildlife biologists have recognized
this 
and are now actually burning marginal forests to
create better wildlife habitat.
The carrying capacity of most habitats can be
increased or decreased. When a farmer decides to
clean up 
a brushy fence row, or clear the fence completely so
that his big farm machinery can work more 


--- Page 14 ---
effectively, he is destroying the home of a variety
of birds and small mammals. When a marsh is drained 
or a new expressway is built, the same thing happens.
The reason that bluebirds have decreased in 
numbers in many areas is a by-product of our search
for beauty. We have cut down many old hollow 
trees. Without hollow trees, bluebirds have no place
to nest. The list of such cases is endless.
In nature, the life of a single individual is
meaningless. For every creature born, one must die.
Nature 
has long ago asserted that two monarch butterflies or
two northern pike cannot occupy the same place at 
the same time. The well attuned outdoorsman
recognizes this. He recognizes that life is based on
the 
conversion of carbon atoms from one form to another.
He recognizes that energy is released by this 
conversion. He recognizes that every creature on
earth, including man, is a user and a consumer of the
carbon atoms. He also recognizes that in our use, we
must strive for harmony with nature and the 
wounds that we leave as a result of our use must heal
quickly, without leaving a scar.
--- Page 10 ---
The Bushmen of the Kalahari Desert teach their sons
the skills of hunting how to stalk and call game, 
how to understand the tracks of animals and other
game signs, the habits and behavior of animals, and 
everything else about the dry, sparse desert brush
around them. The boys learn from childhood. They are 
taken on hunting forays at a very early age and there
is no doubt that experience is a good teacher. It 
takes mud on your boots and many hours of
observation, both in sunny weather and foul, to learn
about 
the habits and ways of wildlife.


--- Page 15 ---
But there are other ways of learning many outdoor
skills. For example, I have learned to identify many 
birds without leaving my living room. Two bird
feeders outside the window and a bird guide were a 
great help. One feeder contained seeds for the seed-
eating birds, while the other held suet for the
insect 
eaters. In my spare moments, I would watch the birds.
Whenever a strange bird visited one of the 
feeders, I would identify it with the help of the
bird guide. Once I learned how to spot their key 
identifying features and learned to recognize the
more common ones, I was ready for the birds in 
woodlots and wilderness areas.
One can learn a great many outdoor skills from books.
Indeed, this is one of the reasons for writing this 
one. I don't mean to imply that books are a
substitute for actual experience. They can't do that,
but they 
can give you the basic instructions - a foundation
that will make the learning process in the field much
easier. They can save you time, money, and mistakes.
From books, you can learn the basics of using a 
compass, sharpening a knife, choosing a canoe,
setting a snare or trap, identifying tracks, or
identifying 
wild plants, whether edible or poisonous. The list is
endless. Once you know the basics, experience will 
give you proficiency. None of us has enough time to
learn all these skills by trial and error and
learning 
solely by experience is a matter of trial and error.
Aside from books, instruction from someone who knows
is another way to knowledge. In many cases 
teachers are superior to books. Learning how to cast
with a fly rod is much easier with proper instruction
than reading a dozen chapters on casting in a dozen
flyfishing books. The same can be said about 


--- Page 16 ---
paddling a canoe, sharpening a knife, and a host of
other things. There is no doubt that an experienced, 
skillful partner from whom one can learn is an
invaluable asset.
Phonograph records and tapes can be used to learn how
to call ducks, geese, and crows, or how to 
imitate the plaintive distress call of a rabbit,
which will attract such predators as foxes and
coyotes. 
Recorded bird songs are an excellent way to learn to
identify the songs of birds.
However, there are things that books and people can
explain, but never really teach. To become a good 
outdoorsman, one needs exposure to the out-of-doors,
but one also needs some basic aptitudes - keen 
powers of observation and an alert mind capable of
rational and logical thinking. Unfortunately not 
everyone possesses these traits. Some people never
learn to think or to see beyond the obvious. With 
many people it is not a question of ability, but of
concentration. A business executive going on a 
weekend backpacking trip will not think beyond the
obvious if he is subconsciously thinking about a 
Monday morning sales meeting. Our way of life, our
society, frequently makes such strong demands on 
us that we cannot divorce ourselves from them and
immerse ourselves completely in our recreational 
pursuits.
--- Page 11 ---
I learned at an early age that a flock of crows
cawing angrily and milling about meant that they had
an 
owl or a hawk up a tree. Birds of prey, particularly
the great homed owl, are traditional enemies of 
crows. If you are a bird watcher, coming across a
group of angry crows like this could mean an 
opportunity to see a hawk or an owl.
A bluejay calling from the same spot probably


--- Page 17 ---
indicates that it has spotted some predator, perhaps
a fox, 
and is boldly scolding the predator and announcing
its presence. The bluejay will also call when it sees
you slipping through the woods. I doubt if there is a
deer hunter around whose presence has not been 
broadcast by a bluejay.
When a beaver far down the lake slaps his tail on the
water and dives under, it means only one thing - 
something has frightened it. It may have been a
fisherman, but if you are deep in the bush where few 
people travel, it could have been something else. I
saw my first pack of timber wolves, a bitch with 
several half grown cubs, under exactly this kind of
circumstance. I had stopped fishing for a moment to 
see what was alarming the beaver, when suddenly the
wolves emerged from the woods and began 
walking along the shore. They passed across a small
bay, no more than 120 yards from me. Since that 
time, I have seen other wolves, black bear, moose,
and deer under similar circumstances.
TRAINING YOUR SENSES
There is no question that our life styles have dulled
our sense of sight, hearing, and very probably smell 
as well. It is not that our eyes are less sharp or
our hearing less keen than those of our ancestors,
but we 
don't use our eyes or our ears in the same way.
Eight or nine years ago I took a city friend moose
hunting - his first moose hunt. Before dawn the first
morning we walked to a beaver meadow and sat down on
a high ridge. As the first arrows of light hurled 
themselves across the yellow grass, we began glassing
the meadow for moose.
"There's nothing there," my partner said almost out
loud.
"I wouldn't say that. I see a cow with two calves," I
whispered.


--- Page 18 ---
"Where?"
"Over that clump of spruce. Those moose are just
inside the bush."
My partner focused his binoculars on the spot I had
indicated, but still could not see the moose. They 
blended fairly well with the dark spruce, but to me,
they were not all that inconspicuous. What gave 
them away were their backs - the only horizontal
lines among a mass of vertical ones. Not until one of
the calves moved was my partner able to pick them
out. Looking for horizontal lines in a forest is one
of 
the first tricks I learned in the outdoors. Sure I
see a great many fallen logs and rocks, but I also
see 
game which would otherwise escape my notice.
--- Page 12 ---
Another thing I learned early is never to look for an
entire animal. You will seldom ever see one in a 
bush until you have waited it out and it steps into
the open. If you want to see a squirrel on a high
oak, 
don't look for a squirrel. Rather look for the tip of
a tail, the odd comer of a head sticking out, or a
bump 
on a branch that may be the bushytail's back, and so
on.
You must also learn where to look. This requires a
fair amount of knowledge about the habitats of 
animals. Don't expect to see a goshawk sitting high
in the top branches of a dead elm. Generally 
goshawks sit in the middle branches and nearly always
in live trees that offer some cover. They prefer to 
sit on the edges of clearings, not outside, but only
a little way into the bush.
Similarly, you will seldom see an old buck deer
walking out in the open in broad daylight. The only


--- Page 19 ---
time 
he will be in the open is at dusk or dawn when
something has really scared him, but then he will be 
running. Big old bucks prefer to travel in some cover
- just inside the tree line, by a brushy fence row,
or 
along a wooded ridge. That is where you should be
looking. Incidentally, foxes usually behave in the 
same way. A fox may lie down in an open field to sun
itself, but it will have gone there at dawn. Once 
it's there, it will stay there, relying on stillness
and camouflage for protection, unless someone or 
something frightens it.
One of the things that separates a seasoned woodsman
from a beginner is the ability to interpret signs. 
An experienced outdoorsman makes a mental note of
everything he sees - a track, a clump of droppings, 
a rub mark, or a claw mark on a tree. Once a partner
of mine and I were hiking up a steep portage trail. I
lugged the canoe while he carried our gear and
fishing tackle. We were going to fish a small lake on
a 
high hill. As we labored up the path, we came across
a pile of bear dung. Our talk turned to bears.
"You know," my partner said, "I've never seen a bear
in the bush except in the big national parks out 
west, and those roadside bears can hardly be
considered wild."
"I can probably show you one today," I replied.
"That's kind of a tall statement," my partner
answered.
It was obvious that he was more than skeptical about
my claim. I said nothing. Coming back late that 
afternoon I put the canoe down at a sharp ridge and
told my partner to leave the gear beside it. I dug
out 
a pair of small binoculars from my packsack and told
my partner to follow me quietly. I knew the 
country well. About half a mile from the trail, the


--- Page 20 ---
hill became a gentle slope. A forest fire had burned 
over the slope twenty or more years ago. The new
trees were in the sapling stage of growth and
included 
several big clumps of wild cherries. There was a good
chance that a bear would be feeding on the 
cherries.
My hunch was right. In fact, there were four bears.
We watched them for a while until we were afraid 
that darkness would overtake us if we didn't leave.
--- Page 13 ---
"How did you know the bears would be there?" my
partner asked when we got back to our canoe and 
gear.
"Oh, I put two and two together," I replied. "There
were cherry pits in the bear dung. I knew that this 
slope had wild cherries on it because I hunted grouse
here a couple of years ago. And bears are generally 
more active in the mornings and evenings during the
summer months, so they would most likely be at 
the cherries in the late afternoon or early morning."
SOUNDS AND SMELLS
Learning to recognize sounds is equally important to
learning to see and interpret signs. Generally our 
ears are attuned to the mechanical sounds that are
such a large part of our world, but every bird or 
mammal emits a sound of some sort as well. So do
fish, amphibians, reptiles, and insects.
There is no doubt as to what the buzzing of a rattle
on a rattlesnake means. But first you must be able to
identify the sound. I've known people who lived in
country where rattlesnakes were common and who 
ventured outdoors regularly, but who did not know how
a rattlesnake sounded. That kind of ignorance 
could cost them their lives.
Learning to identify wildlife sounds is a facet of
outdoorsmanship, but it is equally important to learn


--- Page 21 ---
what the sounds mean. The chatter of a red squirrel
as it scampers about unconcerned has a specific 
tone. That tone completely changes when the squirrel
spots potential danger.
Once I actually saw a fisher chase a red squirrel
through the treetops. What alerted me to this was the
hysterical chatter before the chase started. Once the
fisher was in pursuit, the squirrel stopped its
chatter. 
It was too busy running for its life.
I am certain that crows possess the most developed
language of all birds. I like crows. They may be 
rogues, but they are not as black as they are
sometimes painted. When I was a kid on the family
farm, I 
spent much of my spare time trying to outwit these
sly birds as they gorged themselves on freshly 
planted corn. Mind you, I learned the futility of
this early, but it was always a good excuse for
roaming 
in the woodlot. That is how crows earned my
everlasting admiration. They seemed to possess a
sound 
for almost every situation and more than one for a
boy with a shotgun.
Our sense of smell has also been blunted, probably by
constant exposure to automobile exhausts, 
outboard motors, dust, and smoke of all kinds,
including cigarettes. I have noticed that when I have
been 
away from the city in the wilderness for a week or
two, my sense of smell becomes much sharper. I can 
detect odors that would normally remain hidden.
Man, or any primate for that matter, is not known for
his olfactory powers. But my association with the 
pre-literate tribes of Africa has shown me that these
people do possess a better sense of smell than we 
do. No doubt once industrialization catches up with


--- Page 22 ---
them, they too will lose it.
--- Page 14 ---
However, our sense of smell does allow us to enjoy
the outdoors more the fragrance of flowers, the 
pleasant but pungent odor of humus and moss, the
sharp smell of cedar, and the sweet smell of pine.
But 
at times it is possible to smell more than that. A
bull elk in rut has a very strong odor. I once knew a
big-
game guide who could smell elk before he could see
them. Big rattlesnakes also exude a strong, goat-
like smell when angry. Bears sometimes emit strong
odors. At times I have smelled bear long before 
seeing their fresh tracks in soft earth. These odors
are so distinctive that once they are identified, you
will never forget them.
As I write this, my favorite dog is curled up at my
feet underneath my desk. This is her favorite spot 
when I am working. I have often wondered what it
would be like to have a sense of smell like hers. She
can point a ruffed grouse at thirty yards or farther.
INTERPRETING ANIMAL ACTIONS
Interpreting the actions of birds and mammals is
something that can be learned only by observing them.
Once while on a canoe trip in northern Manitoba, I
met a young couple on an island campsite. Our talk 
eventually turned to blueberries. The young woman
expressed great interest in picking some. The three 
of us paddled across to the mainland and climbed a
steep hill to look for a blueberry patch. We found 
one, but a black bear in the brown-color phase that
is common in western Canada, had found it first.
The bear greeted our intrusion by standing up.
"He's going to charge!" the man injected fearfully.


--- Page 23 ---
With this, the bear dropped onto its four feet and
with 
a loud "whoof " bounded into the bush.
"What made you think he was going to charge?" I asked
incredulously.
"When I saw him stand, I thought we were in trouble,"
the young man said.
"Bears standing on their hind legs charge only in
wood cuts of old books and calendars," I answered. 
The bear had stood up to have a better look at us. He
was trying to figure out what we were. Bears have 
very poor eyesight. When a bear charges, he comes on
all fours. That is the only way he can run fast. In 
a really determined charge, his mouth is wide open
and his lips are in full snarl. He is likely to roar
when 
he begins the charge. And, of course, the only bear
that will charge a man unprovoked is a grizzly or a 
polar bear.
Almost everyone knows that to approach big game you
must have the wind in your favor - blowing into 
your face or at least across your face. But there are
other things to consider as well. Wild sheep and 
pronghorns have extremely good eyesight. A man
appearing against a skyline will frighten both
species. 
If you want to get close to a bighorn or a pronghorn,
walk below the ridge top, stealing only peeks over 
the hilltop. Sheep are generally easier to approach
from above. They don't seem to be as watchful in that
direction, probably because potential predators such
as wolves, cougars, or bears generally approach 
from below. Get above the sheep if you want to have a
closer look or if you want to get within camera 
--- Page 15 ---
range.
If you want to see big game, pay close attention to


--- Page 24 ---
thermal breezes. As the air heats and cools in hilly,
rolling country, it causes thermal breezes. At times
these breezes are so gentle and faint that you may
not 
notice them. In the morning, when the sun's early
rays hit the side of a mountain that has been cool
all 
night, the air at the lower elevation warms up and
gently flows uphill. In the late afternoon, when the 
hillside becomes dark, the reverse happens and the
thermal breeze flows downward.
To someone out for a stroll, thermal breezes mean
nothing. But if you are hunting big game - with a 
camera or a rifle - these breezes become important.
They can carry a warning scent from you to the 
animal, spooking it before you can even get close.
Chapter 3
Wildlife Hazards
The western mountains are a spectacular sight, but a
mountain slope without wild sheep is just a 
landscape. It is wildlife that makes landscapes come
alive. There is no doubt that wildlife is one of the 
big attractions, one of the main reasons why people
venture into the out-of-doors.
Yet there are times when some species can prove to be
something of a nuisance, or even a hazard. For 
example, I have had porcupines chew up my ax handles
and canoe paddles. Of course, the porkies were 
after the salt on the handles from the sweat off my
hands. I have also had raccoons raid my food 
supplies, and even chipmunks and mice will nibble
holes in cardboard food boxes to get at the contents.
I have even had mink steal my fish. These nuisances
are easy to cope with. In most cases the damage is 
due to the outdoorsman's carelessness. On canoe trips
I hang my food when asleep or when I am away 
from camp. When camping with an automobile, I lock my
food in a metal ice chest or wooden box. I 


--- Page 25 ---
now keep my ax and canoe paddles by my side when
asleep, or in a tent when I am away. And I have 
never minded sharing my catch with a mink,
particularly if I can get a look at this attractive
little fur-
bearer.
However, every outdoorsman must recognize that there
are species of wildlife that are potentially 
dangerous. All bears are potentially dangerous,
particularly females with young, and bears that just
feel 
threatened. Bull moose during the rutting season have
been known to be cantankerous. All small 
carnivores - foxes, coyotes, skunks, and raccoons, in
particular - are potential rabies carriers. Of course
everyone realizes that poisonous snakes are
dangerous. Porcupines are dangerous to dogs. But most
dangerous of all are big-game animals on roads and
highways. There are ways to cope with all these 
potential hazards.
BEARS
All bears can be dangerous. The black bear seldom
presents any real hazard. Sows with cubs have 
attacked people when they believed that the cubs were
threatened, but unprovoked attacks are extremely 
rare. Black bears can be a nuisance. I have had black
bears raid my food supplies and even break into 
--- Page 16 ---
my tent. I have had them steal moose meat from me.
Black bears raid garbage containers and 
"panhandle" in many of the national parks. These
half-tame bears are very dangerous because they have 
no natural fear of humans. I remember one
particularly stupid incident of a black bear badly
mauling a 
woman tourist. The woman was feeding the bear cookies


--- Page 26 ---
while her husband was filming the event, but 
the woman ran out of cookies and the bear became
angry because his supply of cookies had suddenly 
been cut off.
Grizzly bears (and in this I include the big Alaskan
brown bear) and polar bears are much more 
dangerous and more aggressive than black bears. They
are also much bigger and much stronger. The 
polar bear is dangerous because he seldom, if ever,
comes into contact with humans. Polar bears have 
actually come up to people from a great distance.
Grizzlies attack people with some regularity. The
grizzly has been known to attack completely 
unprovoked. Some years ago one grizzly killed two
young women in one of the big national parks while 
they were asleep in their sleeping bags.
Sows with cubs are more prone to attack than lone
bears. If you ever accidentally come between a sow 
grizzly and her cubs, she will attack. But a grizzly
at a food site, such as a winter-starved elk, is also
dangerous. If the bear thinks that you are out there
to steal his food, he may come at you. More than one 
big-game hunter has been charged by a grizzly that
claimed the hunter's kill.
Of course a wounded grizzly is very dangerous. If he
gets away into thick cover, the deck becomes 
vastly stacked in his favor. I figure there is better
than a fifty-fifty chance that the hunter will be
mauled 
or killed.
Both polar bears and grizzlies will also raid food
caches if they come across them. But they are not the
raiders that the black bear is. This may be because
they are not as numerous as black bears and because 
they live in areas where large numbers of people
never venture.
No one should venture into bear country without being
observant. If you see a bear, give him a wide 


--- Page 27 ---
berth. Go ahead and watch him, but from a safe
distance with binoculars. When traveling in the
grizzly 
country of the western states, western Canada, and
Alaska, I would use binoculars to glass the 
countryside whenever possible before walking through
it.
If the cover is too thick, make a noise as you walk -
talk, sing, whistle. Some hikers carry tin cans
filled 
with pebbles to rattle. Nearly every bear will run if
he gets a chance, if he's warned that a human is 
present. When walking in thick cover, as on a forest
trail, look at the trail for grizzly tracks. If fresh
tracks are present, be extra cautious. Both grizzly
and black bears have very poor eyesight. Their senses
of smell and hearing are excellent, perhaps better
than that of a white-tailed deer or an elk.
Bears nearly always begin their charge with a roar.
There is no mistaking their intention. Their lips are
furled and their jaws are wide open. Incidentally,
the old trick of playing dead when being mauled by a 
bear seems to work. There are a number of incidents
when this has saved the victim's life.
--- Page 17 ---
The fact that bears can be dangerous should not deter
anyone from venturing into bear country. If you 
exhibit a trace of caution and common sense, you will
be in no danger. Walking across the average city 
street presents greater danger than hiking in bear
country.
OTHER WILD LIFE
Deer, elk, caribou, moose, wild sheep, mountain
goats, bison, cougars, and wolves present no danger. 
They are all very fearful of man. Cougars and wolves


--- Page 28 ---
have been known to follow people, but this seems 
to be largely due to curiosity. Actual attacks are
rare. There are only two or three cougar attacks on 
record. Similarly, there are very few wolf attacks on
record and there is a strong probability that the 
attacking wolves were rabid. Bull moose during the
rutting season have been known to chase people, to 
attack horses, and even to attack automobiles and
trains. But such incidents are very rare. Bull moose
in 
rut sometimes do unusual things, but I can recall
doing unusual things when I was amorously chasing 
some young maiden.
RABIES
The incidence of rabies has increased dramatically in
recent years. This may be a cyclic sort of 
phenomenon or because the numbers of small
carnivorous animals have increased and there is a
larger 
pool for the virus. The reason why we have more
coyotes, foxes, skunks, and raccoons is twofold:
first, 
our farmers and agriculture departments have become
more enlightened and no longer hire poisoners to 
kill these creatures and, second, few men earn a
living as fur trappers any more. There are easier and
more comfortable ways to earn one's daily bacon and
beans.
A rabid animal is a dangerous one. The most common
symptom of rabies is unusual behavior; for 
example, a fox running toward you rather than away
from you or acting sick and stupid. If you 
encounter such an animal, stay away from it. Keep
your kids and dogs away from it. If you have a 
firearm, shoot the animal, but not through the head.
You don't want to damage the brain. A veterinarian 
will need a section from the brain to determine if
the animal was rabid or just acting strangely without


--- Page 29 ---
any apparent motive.
If anyone is bitten by a wild animal, he should see a
doctor immediately. It is even more important then 
to kill the animal that did the biting, so that it
can be diagnosed for rabies. If the doctor cannot
learn 
whether the animal was rabid, he will have to assume
that it was and begin a series of anti-rabies 
injections. If your dogs go with you on outdoor
rambles, they should be vaccinated against rabies and
receive proper boosters regularly.
DEQUILLING A DOG
For some reason, many dogs don't like porcupines.
Maybe it is because the slow, dull-witted porky 
seems helpless. When a dog rushes in to attack he, of
course, gets an unpleasant surprise. Embedded 
quills are dangerous if not removed soon. They will
work into the dog, causing pain, infection, and 
--- Page 18 ---
possibly even death if they hit vital organs. If you
are near a vet, get your dog to him right away. The
vet 
will anesthetize the dog and remove the quills. If
you are on a wilderness trip, you will have to
dequill 
the dog yourself.
To do this, you will have to have someone hold the
dog still or, if a second person is not available,
you 
will have to tie the dog. The best way to do this is
to wrap a jacket or blanket around the dog and tie it
with a rope or belt so that the dog cannot hit you
with his feet. Twist out each quill slowly with a
pair of 
needle-nosed pliers, starting in the chest area.
Remember that the dog will be frightened and in pain,


--- Page 30 ---
and 
may become a fear biter. You may have to use a muzzle
or gently tie the dog's mouth closed with a 
handkerchief or a piece of rope. When you have taken
out the quills, get the dog to the veterinarian as 
soon as possible so that he can get a shot to prevent
any secondary infection.
WILDLIFE ON HIGHWAYS
Big-game animals - mostly deer, but sometimes elk,
moose, and even bears - are a very real hazard to 
motorists traveling in big-game country. Some years
ago I wrote a story on this for one of the motoring 
magazines. To document my story, I obtained
statistics from states known for their vast deer
herds. My 
findings surprised me. In one year, the relatively
small state of Pennsylvania alone, reported 22,610 
automobile collisions with deer. Texas reported
16,145; California, 8517; and Michigan, 7077, just to
name a few. The province of Ontario reported 153
collisions with moose and 45 with black bears. Many 
of the moose collisions caused human fatalities.
A motorist in big-game country should drive
defensively. You never know when a deer may leap out
in 
front of your car. If you see a deer on the side of a
road, slow down. Obey all deer-crossing signs. (They 
were put there for a purpose.) A deer may be standing
in the middle of the road just around the next 
bend. If an animal is on the road at night, turn your
headlights off momentarily, leaving on only your 
parking lights. The animal may be mesmerized by the
beam of light, and the moment of darkness may 
be enough for it to jump out of the way.
If a collision seems unavoidable, don't try to swerve
to miss the animal. You may go into a spin and lose 
control of the car, hitting something more
formidable, such as a rock or a tree. It is best to
hit the animal 


--- Page 31 ---
straight on. If a collision does occur, treat it like
any other accident and report it to the police. Even
if the 
damage to your car is negligible, report the accident
to a conservation officer. If the animal is seriously
injured, he will want to track it down to prevent
further suffering. He may be able to salvage some of
the 
meat for a charitable institution. He may also want
to take biological data from the animal.
Above all, don't go near the stricken animal. Wounded
deer have been known to lash out with their 
hoofs and cause injuries. Wounded moose or bears are
even more dangerous. Let a police officer or a 
conservation officer deal with the animal.
SNAKES
Snakes have been feared, vilified, and venerated by
man from time immemorial. Generally western 
--- Page 19 ---
culture has been anti-snake. And even today there are
still ignorant people around who kill every snake 
on sight. But we are slowly becoming more enlightened
and are starting to realize that snakes are an 
interesting group of animals.
Of the two-hundred-plus species of snakes found in
the United States and Canada, only a few are 
poisonous. Many species, even the poisonous ones, are
very beneficial in controlling populations of 
small rodents. However, there is no question that
care should be exercised by anyone venturing into the
out-of-doors in country where poisonous snakes are
common. The outdoorsman should not only be able 
to recognize poisonous snakes, but should know the
type of habitat that they prefer, the precautions to
be 
taken against being bitten, and what to do in case of


--- Page 32 ---
a snake bite.
There are two families of terrestrial poisonous
snakes on this continent - the coral snakes and the
pit 
vipers. The latter group includes the rattlesnakes,
the cottonmouth, and the copperhead.
The Coral Snakes 
The eastern coral snake is found from the Carolinas
to central Texas. It is twenty to thirty-inches long 
and has bands of red, yellow, and black along its
body. The key identifying feature of this snake is
that 
the red and yellow rings touch each other. There are
a number of harmless snakes that also have brightly 
colored bands, but in these species the red and
yellow rings are separated by a black band and the
red 
and yellow rings do not touch.
The eastern coral snake is a secretive creature. It
is rarely seen in broad daylight. It preys on frogs, 
lizards, and other snakes. The venom of this snake is
highly lethal and can be treated only with anti-
venom and medical care.
There are a number of subspecies or races of the
coral snake, such as the Texas coral snake and the 
Arizona coral snake. All of the coral snakes have a
small mouth and short fangs. For this reason they 
cannot bite through clothing and sturdy footwear
easily. However, naked toes and fingers are
vulnerable.
The Pit Vipers 
The members of the pit viper family are characterized
by deep facial pits on each side of the head, a
little 
less than midway between the eye and the nostril. The
mouths of these snakes have large, hollow fangs 
mounted on short maxillary bones. When the mouth is
closed, the fangs are folded against the roof of the 
mouth. The fangs rotate into an erect position only
when the snake opens its mouth. The heads of most 


--- Page 33 ---
pit vipers are triangular in shape.
The copperhead is a fairly large snake, generally
running between twenty-four and thirty-six inches in 
length. It has a coppery-red head with an hourglass
pattern, hence its name. Its back and sides are 
covered with chestnut markings that are narrow at the
top of the back and wide on the sides. Dark, 
rounded spots mark the belly.
--- Page 20 ---
There are several races of copperheads. The markings
of these races vary slightly in detail and color.
Copperheads are found from Massachusetts south to
Florida and from southern Illinois and Iowa to 
Texas. They live in a fairly wide range of habitats
from rocky, wooded hillsides to low ground near 
swamps. Small rodents are their chief prey, but frogs
are also eaten.
A great many snakes such as the milk snake, the fox
snake, the hog snake, and the water snake are killed 
annually because they are mistaken for the
copperhead. Although a fair number of people are
bitten by 
copperheads, deaths are virtually nonexistent. The
copperhead is not a serious threat to life.
The cottonmouth is a close relative of the
copperhead. It is an even larger snake thirty to
forty-eight 
inches - and is almost entirely aquatic. It is olive
brown or almost black in color when viewed from 
above. It has dark crossbands on its back and a light
belly. The inside of the mouth is white, hence the 
name cottonmouth.
The cottonmouths are found from Virginia to Key West,
west to Oklahoma and central Texas. The 
cottonmouth is basically an aquatic snake, living in
swamps, lakes, rivers, and rice fields. It likes to
sun 
itself on rocks and floating logs. On occasion, it


--- Page 34 ---
may invade the uplands and be found hibernating with 
copperheads. Fish, frogs, salamanders, and even other
snakes are the chief prey of the cottonmouth, but 
this snake is an opportunist and will eat anything
that it can handle.
The cottonmouth is much more dangerous than the
copperhead. It is a bigger snake, hence it is likely
to 
inject more venom when it strikes. When excited, the
cottonmouth will vibrate its tail. When fully 
aroused, it will throw its head backwards and open
its jaws. The cottonmouth is aggressive. The splash 
of a paddle will frighten most other snakes away, but
the cottonmouth is likely to stand its ground. Bass 
fishermen and hunters entering the southern swamps
should learn to identify the cottonmouth at a 
glance. Again, many other water snakes are killed
through ignorance because they are mistaken for the 
cottonmouth.
There are about a dozen species of rattlesnakes
varying in size from fifteen to seventy-two inches.
They 
range from New Hampshire, southern Ontario, and
southern Saskatchewan southward right to the Gulf 
coast and into Mexico, and from New Jersey to
California. As a group, the rattlesnakes live in a
variety 
of habitats from rocky forests, to wet bottomlands
and marshes, to deserts and grasslands. The hallmark 
of these snakes is, of course, the rattle on the tip
of their tails. The rattle consists of loosely
attached 
segments which strike against each other when the
tail is vibrated. The rattle is best described as a 
buzzing noise, somewhat similar to that made by
cicadas. The larger species produce the loudest
noises. 
Generally rattlesnakes rattle only when angry or
aroused - as a warning, but don't count on this. In
cool 


--- Page 35 ---
weather the snake may be too lethargic to vibrate its
tail. Certainly every outdoorsman should learn to 
recognize the rattle of a rattlesnake, as well as the
snakes themselves.
The best way to learn to identify the rattlesnake -
in fact, snakes of all kinds - is from exhibits of 
mounted specimens in museums or from live specimens
in zoos and snake exhibits. Field guides to 
reptiles and amphibians are also useful.
--- Page 21 ---
By and large, the larger rattlesnakes - the
diamondback and the timber rattlesnake - are more
dangerous 
than the smaller species. Although all rattlesnakes,
if given a chance, will try to escape, the larger
ones 
are less apt to do so. When aroused, they will face
the intruder and rattle vigorously. Unfortunately the
diamondback and the timber rattlers live in country
frequented by many fishermen, hikers, and campers.
There is no reason why anyone should ever be afraid
of venturing out-of-doors into country where 
poisonous snakes are known to live. Snake bites are
actually a very rare occurrence when compared to 
the host of other accidents that can befall an
outdoorsman. We are many thousand times more likely
to 
be killed driving to our favorite camping area or
trout stream than we are to be bitten by a poisonous 
snake. Snake bites are rarely fatal; less than two
people in every thousand that are bitten die.
Yet everyone traveling through country where
poisonous snakes are known to be abundant should 
exhibit a bit of caution. Being observant is the
first line of defense. Wearing good, sound, leather
boots 
is another. The upland bird hunter can even obtain


--- Page 36 ---
snake leggings made of aluminum mesh. If you are 
rockhounding or climbing in snake country, watch
where you put your hands and what you grab. The 
same goes if you are picking berries or mushrooms.
Use tools to overturn rocks and logs. Learn to 
recognize the buzzing rattle of a rattlesnake and
even the billygoat odor that an aroused rattler 
sometimes emits.
I don't believe in killing any poisonous snake just
because it is poisonous. In my opinion, the only time
a 
man has the right to kill something is when he
intends to eat it or when his life (and possibly his 
property) is being threatened or attacked. I have
traveled through parts of the world where venomous 
snakes were abundant, and I have never been
confronted or threatened by one. But if a rattlesnake
suddenly crawled onto my back lawn and I had no way
of disposing of it alive, I would kill it. This 
would also apply to a poisonous snake on a public
campground where young children were playing.
TREATING A SNAKE BITE
There is a lot of controversy surrounding the
treatment of snake bites. In the past, the
recommended 
procedure was to apply a tourniquet, make an incision
around the bite, and suck the fluids from the 
wound. This has generally been discredited by the
medical profession because in many cases this 
treatment has been known to cause much harm. However,
there are other things that can be done. 
Obviously the victim should be taken to a hospital as
quickly as is feasible. If possible, the victim
should 
be carried to a vehicle. If the victim has to move on
his own, he should do so by walking slowly. The 
victim should be kept calm. No alcohol or other
stimulants should be consumed by him. In short, 
everything possible should be done to keep his


--- Page 37 ---
heartbeat normal.
If the bite is on the extremities, a tourniquet may
help to keep the venom contained. Be sure not to have
the tourniquet too tight and to loosen it every few
minutes. You must not stop all circulation. Keep the 
bitten extremity lower to the ground than the heart.
This will slow the movement of venom to the heart.
The use of ice as a cold pack in treating snake bite
is also very controversial. It has been known to
cause 
--- Page 22 ---
tissue damage and other problems. If ice has any
beneficial role to play, it is only during the first
hour or 
so after the bite.
Injections of anti-venom are the usual way of
treating snake bite. Antivenom, or AV as it is
usually 
called, is a horse serum. Its misuse can be fatal.
Generally it should be injected by a physician. It is
available only on prescription. People who spend much
time in country where poisonous snakes are 
abundant may wish to consult their family doctor
about prescribing an AV kit so that they have it with
them in case of emergency. AV is not always available
in small hospitals. Many doctors may be 
reluctant to issue prescriptions because the AV kit
comes with a syringe which has a needle about one-
and-a-half inches long. It takes a fair amount of
expertise to use such a needle. The needle is always 
injected into a thick muscle mass such as the
buttocks or thigh. There is a further danger in the
use of 
AV with people who cannot tolerate horse serum.
One thing is certain about snake bite. People in good


--- Page 38 ---
physical condition are less apt to die or have 
serious problems than people who are soft and out of
shape. Also, physically larger people tend to have 
an easier time. Children are more susceptible because
they tend to panic and they are small.
OTHER REPTILES
There are two poisonous lizards in the world, and
both are found in the southwest - the gila monster
and 
the Mexican beaded lizard. Again, the bite of these
lizards is seldom fatal. Indeed, people are seldom 
bitten by them. There are only little more than
thirty recorded instances of bites to people. The
Spanish 
explorer Francisco Hernandez recorded, back in 1577,
that the bite was painful but not fatal.
There are a few other reptiles that one should be
cautious of. The American alligator and American 
crocodile are two obvious ones, but they are seldom
encountered in the wild except in the coastal 
regions of Louisiana and wilderness areas of Florida.
Neither of these large reptiles has the dangerous 
reputation of some of the African species. The
snapping turtle can inflict a painful bite, but does
so only 
when someone annoys it on land. In water, the turtle
makes every effort to get away. Some of the larger 
water snakes will bite if handled carelessly. The
bites of these snakes are not poisonous, but in some 
cases they have been known to cause nausea.
The best precaution against wildlife hazards is to
watch all wildlife with interest but at a safe
distance. 
There is no reason why anyone should cause
intentional stress to a wild creature by approaching
it 
closely just to satisfy his idle curiosity.
Chapter 4
Beating the Bugs
One of the biggest annoyances in the out-of-doors is


--- Page 39 ---
biting and stinging insects. Indeed, some of these 
insect stings can be dangerous to hypersensitive
individuals. But there are ways that biting insects
can be 
beaten, or at least their bites kept to a minimum.
Let's discuss the potentially dangerous insects
first.
--- Page 23 ---
WASPS, HORNETS, AND BEES
Wasps, yellowjackets, bumblebees, and honeybees all
carry venom that, on an equal volume basis, is as 
dangerous as the venom of a rattlesnake. Obviously
these insects inject only minuscule doses of this 
poison at a time, but the venom is known to have an
accumulative effect. The first few stings may bring 
on only normal symptoms of pain and slight swelling
in the area of the injection. However, after several 
stings, the reaction may worsen and bring on a
variety of serious symptoms including death. More 
people die annually in North America as a result of
being stung by hornets, wasps, and other stinging 
insects than as a result of snake bites.
Precautionary measures are the first defense. Don't
disturb these insects or their nests. Wear neutral-
colored clothing such as offwhites, tans, and greens;
bright colors attract them, and bees actually seem to
be angered by black. Don't use sweet or strong-
smelling perfumes and after-shave lotions. These also
appear to attract bees, wasps, and hornets. Keep
food, particularly sweet things, covered at all
times. 
After your meal, don't leave such food on picnic
tables.Put it away in your tent or cooler. Don't put 
wildflowers on picnic tables. Wear shoes;
yellowjackets live in the ground.>>
Bee stings, surprisingly enough, cause more deaths


--- Page 40 ---
than wasps, yellowjackets, and hornets combined. 
The reason no doubt is due to their great numbers.
Most people are stung by bees at home in their own 
garden or back yard, rather than in the wilds.
Wasps, hornets and yellowjackets are dangerous
because frequently they attack in swarms. A single 
wasp nest may hold 10,000 insects. For some reason
youngsters like to throw rocks and sticks at such 
nests. This is one sure way of inviting trouble.
Bumblebees rarely sting.
What should you do if you get stung? Well, there are
several things you can do. If you have been stung 
by a bee, the stinger will still be in the wound. A
bee can sting only once because its stinger has barbs
that embed it in the wound. The bee will tear the
stinger from its body when it flies off, and it will
die 
moments later. So first you must remove the stinger
from the wound as fast as you can. The longer the 
stinger remains, the more venom the poison sac will
release into the wound through its hollow needle. 
Don't pick the stinger off, because by grasping the
top end where the poison sac is, you will inject more
venom into the wound. Instead, scrape it off with a
knife blade, a wooden match, or even a fingernail. 
Now, as fast as you can, apply ice from your ice
chest to the wound. This will slow down the spreading
of the poison. Keep away from heat. Mud applications
have been recommended for stings in the past, 
but forget it unless the mud is ice cold. Ammonia is
equally useless.
Hornet and wasp stings will not leave a stinger in
the wound. These insects can inflict more than one 
sting at a time. The treatment is the same as for bee
stings except, of course, there is no stinger to 
remove. Medical attention should be sought
immediately if multiple stings have been received or


--- Page 41 ---
if 
hypersensitivity to such stings is suspected or
known.
Anyone who suffers badly from asthma or hayfever or
has a strong reaction when stung by common 
insects such as mosquitos, horseflies, and deerflies,
should treat wasp, hornet and bee stings with 
--- Page 24 ---
extreme caution.
There are special first-aid kits on the market for
people who are hypersensitive to the stings of bees, 
wasps, hornets, and the like. Generally these are
available only with a doctor's prescription. If you
or one 
of your family is hypersensitive, you should 'consult
your family doctor about having this type of kit 
with you at home and on outdoor rambles.
These kits contain pills, sterile alcohol pads, a
tourniquet, and a hypodermic syringe with 0.3 ml of 
Epinephrine, plus an instruction folder. The
medication in the syringe serves to slow down the
poison's 
reaction until the pills begin to work.
SCORPIONS AND SPIDERS
The black widow spider and the scorpion are two other
insects that an outdoorsman may, on rare 
occasions, encounter. Bites from both of these
insects are dangerous, but only rarely lethal.
Generally black widow spiders are found in rubbish
heaps and old ramshackle buildings. If you are fond 
of visiting old ghost towns, abandoned mines, and
other similar spots, you should exercise a bit of 
caution.
Scorpions are nocturnal insects. They spend their
days under rocks, brush piles, and leaves. The only 
real hazard is that they may choose some shaded spot
in camp, such as a rubber mattress, under which to 
hide as dawn approaches. If you are traveling in


--- Page 42 ---
scorpion country, it is wise to exhibit a bit of
caution by 
shaking out your boots and checking over your
sleeping bag before using them.
A bite from a scorpion or a black widow may cause
swelling, pain, nausea, fever, and even speech and 
breathing difficulties. Obviously the more allergic
the person is to these venoms, the more drastic is
the 
reaction. Children are more susceptible than adults,
but as I said earlier, death due to black widow or 
scorpion bites occurs rarely and then only in extreme
cases. Anyone bitten by these insects should be 
taken to a doctor immediately. First aid should
consist of an application of an ice pack, ice water,
or 
simply a chunk of ice to the bitten area. If the bite
is on a foot or a hand, a tourniquet can be used. The
tourniquet must be applied with extreme care. Never
tie the tourniquet too tightly and be sure to release
it every few minutes. The bitten person should be
kept calm. The heart beat and pulse of an excited 
person are much faster than normal, hence the venom
spreads much more quickly. The bitten person 
should not walk more than necessary. Remember,
exercise also quickens heart beat and pulse.
MOSQUITOS AND BLACKFLIES
Mosquitos and blackflies are two of the most common
pests that an outdoorsman has to endure. Usually 
they are worse during early to midspring but, in some
areas such as the Arctic, they can be troublesome 
during the entire summer.
Fortunately both of these insects are easy to combat.
Proper clothing is the first and best line of
defense. 
--- Page 25 ---


--- Page 43 ---
Clothes should be loose on the body and of fairly
tightly woven material. With such clothes, the 
mosquito's mouth parts cannot penetrate to the bare
skin. Clothing should be light in color; off-whites 
and light khakis are much less attractive to
blackflies and mosquitos than darker colors.
Blackflies in 
particular are attracted to dark colors. In very bad
blackfly country, the pantlegs and cuffs of shirt 
sleeves should be tied around the ankle and wrist or,
in the case of pantlegs, tucked into boots, so that 
the insects cannot get inside clothing.
Insect repellents are the second and excellent form
of defense. There are a vast number of these on the 
market, but the best by far that I have ever tested
is Cutter's. Most insect repellents can be obtained
in 
aerosol sprays, oils, jellies, and sticks. They all
have their advantages and disadvantages. Aerosol
sprays 
are good because they can be sprayed over clothing.
Oils and jellies stay on the skin much longer, giving
better protection and they are less easily washed off
by. sweat.
In areas where mosquitos and blackflies are very
troublesome, a mosquito head net and even a pair of 
cotton gloves are good means of protection. These are
particularly good if you are doing something like 
wildlife photography where you cannot move about or
swat at insects without alarming your subjects. 
Then dark gloves and a head net also serve as
camouflage for your white face and hands.
Smoke, both from a fire and a pipe, is a good
defensive or offensive weapon against both blackflies
and 
mosquitos. Smoke is just about the only thing the
Indians had, and don't think that Indians weren't 
troubled by these bugs. They were and are, but they
also had a philosophical attitude that these insects 


--- Page 44 ---
were unavoidable and they had to put up with them.
Clouds of blackflies did not excite them nor  
frighten them - as much as they do some white men.
However, I have observed that many of the younger 
Indians in the northern bush are reacting to
mosquitos and blackflies as badly as some white men.
Our 
race is not the only one whose children have gone
soft.
Another good defense against blackflies and mosquitos
is wind. When walking, stick to high ridges, 
open fields, and lake shores where the wind is
stronger. Make your campsite on breezy islands, open 
ridges, and points. Your tent should have a good fly
screen and a sewn-in floor.
Blackflies breed in running water. That is why they
are more troublesome in the spring when the run-off 
is strong. Once the upland rills have dried up,
blackflies decline in numbers very sharply. If you
are out 
during blackfly season, it is a good idea to make
your camp away from running water, away from the fly 
source. On the other hand, mosquitos breed in
stagnant water. Once such pools and ponds dry up, 
mosquitos also decline in number. Again, you can
minimize the effect of these insects by making camp 
as far away as possible from their breeding habitat.
With mosquitos, it is the female that causes the 
problem. The male is strictly a vegetarian; the
female needs a blood meal - protein for the
development 
of eggs.
HORSEFLIES AND DEERFLIES
Deerflies and horseflies are two very aggressive
insects. They will follow and attack incessantly.
Loose, 
tightly woven clothing is the best defense. Insect
repellents help, but they are not as effective
against 


--- Page 45 ---
--- Page 26 ---
mosquitos and blackflies. A head net is very
effective where these two insects are most
troublesome, but 
generally the peak deerfly and horsefly season is in
the summer when hot weather makes a head net 
even more uncomfortable than deerfly or horsefly
bites.
Both of these insects are most common in areas where
cattle and horses are abundant or in good big-
game country. The more deer, elk, or moose in an
area, the more deerflies and horseflies. If you are 
rambling about in big game country hoping to see,
photograph, or bag a deer, elk, or moose, you will 
have to put up with these flies during the summer and
early fall.
CHIGGERS AND ITCH MITES
Chiggers are almost microscopic. One of these little
red devils is about 1/200 (.005) of an inch long. 
They live on vegetation brush and tall grass and are
picked up on your clothing as you walk by. Once 
they hitch a ride on a human, they crawl into the
warm areas - under the armpits, under the wristwatch 
strap, and into the groin.
The itch mite is about the same size as the chigger
and is white or pale yellow in color. The female 
burrows under the skin and lays eggs. As it burrows,
it feeds on the tissue and releases a toxin that 
dissolves tissues and causes swelling and itching.
If you are traveling in chigger and itch mite
country, keep away from stands of thick, lush
vegetation 
whenever possible. Keeping pantlegs inside boots may
also help. Dusting ankles, wrists, necklines, and 
other exposed areas with powdered sulphur is a good
bet if chiggers or itch mites are really bad. In the 
evenings, if at all possible, take hot, soapy baths
or a shower. Water will wash chiggers and itch mites 
off. There are also ointments on the market that kill


--- Page 46 ---
both of these insects. Drugstores in chigger and itch
mite country generally stock these ointments.
TICKS
Ticks are very common insect pests. They live by
sucking blood. They can also transmit a disease 
known as spotted fever, but this disease is not at
all prevalent. Most ticks are brown or green in color
and are about one quarter of an inch long - before
they gorge themselves with blood. Bloodfilled ticks 
may be several times the length of ticks that have
not fed.
Ticks are picked up off vegetation and, like
chiggers, they crawl to some area of bare skin. Here
they 
bite painlessly through the skin and bury their heads
in. A favorite area for ticks on humans is the back 
of the neck along the hairline or the back of the
ears. When traveling in known tick country, check
your 
clothing carefully and your body every night. Insect
repellent sprayed on clothing acts as a deterrent to 
some extent.
Exercise great care when removing ticks to insure
that you do not simply tear off the body and leave
the 
insect's head or mouth parts under the skin where
they may fester. Ticks may be removed with tweezers 
in one hand and a pin or needle in the other. The pin
or needle is used to pry the mouth loose. A slower 
--- Page 27 ---
and safer way to remove ticks is to coat the insect
heavily with a greasy lotion vaseline or molten 
paraffin. These materials shut off the air supply
from the insect and eventually force it to let go.
Burning 
the insect with a cigarette is also effective and it


--- Page 47 ---
can then be picked off with tweezers. Dabbing the 
insect with rubbing alcohol will generally also make
it let go.
One last tip about ticks. Dogs are very susceptible
to them. If you are out with your dog in tick
country, 
examine the animal very carefully every evening.
CATERPILLARS
There are a number of caterpillars - the puss
caterpillar, the hag-moth caterpillar, and the
saddleback 
caterpillar - that have irritating secretions in
their hairs. These secretions can cause itching and
nasty, 
painful blisters. If you cannot recognize the
different species of caterpillars, don't touch any of
them - 
just look.
COPING WITH ITCHING BITES
The bites of blackflies, sandflies, mosquitos, itch
mites, and chiggers all itch. The severity of the
itching 
depends on the sensitivity of the individual bitten
and, of course, on the extent of the bites. Swelling
is 
usual, particularly from mosquito and itch mite
bites. Scratching the bites can cause a secondary 
infection to develop and it, of course, makes the
itching worse.
Use ice to alleviate the swelling. A mixture of
baking soda and water in a thick paste will help to 
alleviate itching. Calamine lotion is helpful and
should be included among items to take when venturing
into bug country. The commercial preparation
Absorbine Jr. is also good for treating mosquito
bites that 
itch and have swollen.
[[CHAPTER 5 ?]]
There are a number of members of the plant world that


--- Page 48 ---
are poisonous to man in one form or another. The 
chapter on wilderness survival delves a little into
plants that are poisonous to eat. This chapter deals
with 
plants that most commonly produce an adverse reaction
when touched - poison ivy, poison sumac, and 
poison oak. At one time or another most outdoorsmen
come across one or all of these plants. However, 
some people react to them much more severely than
others. Some people don't react at all.
All of these plants produce toxic chemical agents
that can cause anything from mild itching to severe 
blistering when they come in contact with skin. For
sensitive people, only a small amount of the toxic 
material is needed to produce a severe reaction. Most
commonly people come in contact with the toxins 
of these plants by walking through a patch or rubbing
against poisonous climbing plants on trees and 
fences. However, there are other ways in which the
toxin can be transferred. Often dogs pick up the 
toxin on their coats and transfer it to persons who
touch them. Insects pick up the poison on their feet 
and then land on exposed hands or arms. Hikers pick
it up on their boots and pantlegs and then touch it 
with bare hands when removing their clothing.
The chemical that causes all the misery is a phenol
found in the sap of the plant. This is why it is much
--- Page 28 ---
more prevalent during the spring and early summer
(the growing season) than during the fall or winter.
The best method of dealing with poison ivy, poison
sumac, and poison oak is to learn to recognize the 
plants and to avoid contact with them.
POISON IVY
Poison ivy is by far the most common troublemaker.
Commonly it grows in thickets, open woods, sandy 
or rocky places, and on fence rows through most of


--- Page 49 ---
the United States except in some very arid regions.
It 
is fairly abundant in southern Quebec, Ontario, the
Great Lakes region, and the mid-west. It is not 
known to grow above the tree line.
Poison ivy is a twining, climbing vine that is almost
shrub-like in appearance, but it can also support 
itself by aerial roots on the trunks of trees and on
fences, or it can be found in partially shaded
woodlots 
among low growing plants such as ferns.
Poison ivy has one easily recognizable characteristic
- its compound leaf consisting of three leaflets. 
These leaflets are a bright, glossy green, oval-
shaped, and smoothly textured. They are clustered 
together and have sharply tipped points and widely
serrated edges.
The flowers of poison ivy, present in the spring and
early summer, are borne in clusters and are small 
and inconspicuous. The flowers are dainty, and vary
in color from greenish white to cream. Closeknit 
clusters of berries, also greenish white or cream,
develop from these flowers, and become hard and waxy 
when mature. These berries persist through the winter
and are a favorite and harmless food for many 
species of birds. Not all poison ivy plants have
berries.
Such plants as poison ivy, poison oak, and poison
sumac have toxic oils which can cause symptoms 
ranging from mild itching to severe skin blisters.
Learn to recognize these plants.
POISON SUMAC
Poison sumac is a coarse shrub or a small tree
generally ranging from four to twenty feet in height.
It 
also has compound leaves, but the number of leaflets
ranges from seven to thirteen. These leaflets occur 
opposite each other on the branch, and have one
terminal leaflet at the end of the branch. Poison
sumac 


--- Page 50 ---
prefers wet, boggy, acid soils and thus generally
occurs in wooded swamps. Its range extends through 
most of the south and southeastern United States,
along the east coast into New England, through New 
York, the Great Lakes, and the mid-western states,
and through southwestern Quebec and southern 
Ontario.
Poison sumac flowers are similar to those of poison
ivy, but they grow in hanging clusters and originate 
in the axils of leaves. Poison sumac fruits are
shiny, ivory-colored berries that hang in loose and
droopy 
bunches. These bunches may be as long as a foot. The
berries persist throughout winter and provide food 
for many bird species.
--- Page 29 ---
POISON OAK
Poison oak is quite similar to poison ivy in
appearance, but its leaves are thicker and smaller in
size, and 
the ends of the leaves are rounded rather than
pointed. Generally poison oak has the same triple-
leaflet 
formation, but occasionally five leaflets are
produced. The outline of the poison oak leaflet
somewhat 
resembles the leaf of the white oak, hence its name.
POISON OAK
Poison oak prefers dry barrens, pine lands, and
sands, and is most prevalent in the coastal regions.
Along 
the Atlantic coast it favors poor sandy soils and
flourishes in the company of scrub oak and pine.
Poison 
oak was one of the plants most feared by the Cherokee
Indians.
Poisoning from any of these plants may result any
time after contact, from a few hours to a few days. 


--- Page 51 ---
The most common signs of contamination are itching
and inflammation of the skin, followed by the 
emergence of watery blisters. However, the poison
will not spread from a broken blister - the
persistent 
development of new patches of itching and
inflammation means that the toxin is being spread
from 
contaminated clothing or from contact with more
plants.
The effects of these poisonous plants are very severe
on some persons, sometimes requiring 
hospitalization. If you suspect that you have been in
contact with any of these plants, the best procedure 
is to lather copiously with a good, strong, yellow
laundry soap, rinse thoroughly, and then repeat the 
procedure again. If, after this, itching and
inflammation still develop, the wisest procedure is
to visit a 
family physician. A one-percent solution of potassium
permanganate swabbed over the infected area is 
known to give some relief from the itching. The brown
stains produced from this material can be 
removed with lemon juice. Certain iron salts have
also been used for the relief of itching,
particularly 
ferric chloride. This material is mixed with a
quarter glycerin, a quarter alcohol, and half water,
and is 
swabbed on the affected spots, but it stains as well.
Calamine lotion sometimes affords relief from minor 
itching.
STINGING NETTLE
There are a few other plants besides the above that
can be troublesome to the outdoorsman. Among them 
are the stinging or spurge nettles. The stinging
nettle is the more common of the two. The stinging
nettle 
is a bushy looking plant with leaves that are very
coarsely toothed and stiff bristles that "sting" on 


--- Page 52 ---
contact. The plants run from six to thirty inches in
height, and are found in waste places. sand hills,
road 
sides, and so on from Newfoundland west to Manitoba,
and through portions of the mid-western United 
States east to northeastern Virginia. Again, the best
way of dealing with stinging nettle is to learn to 
recognize and avoid it.
CHAPTER 6
MAP AND COMPASS
--- Page 30 ---
No one should venture into the wilderness without a
compass, not even if his only intention is to go over
the ridge to pick blueberries. Most outdoor
recreationists today are urban dwellers. Often their 
knowledge about the country into which they are
venturing is skimpy. Many campers and fishermen set 
off on trips into the wilderness or go for a walk
from their camp without really knowing how to read 
landmarks. Many don't even carry a compass and, of
those who do, many don't know how to use it. It is 
no surprise to me that newspapers and newscasts
regularly carry reports of lost hikers, campers, and 
hunters.
Knowing how to use a compass is a must for anyone who
calls himself an outdoorsman. It is one of the 
primary outdoor skills, like using an ax. Experienced
woodsmen, trappers, and such rarely rely on a 
compass to find their way. But generally they have an
uncanny sense of direction. This sense is based on 
many things, including the lay of the land and the
ability to see and absorb inconspicuous landmarks and
it comes as a result of many years in the bush.
Most of us are not that fortunate. For example, it is
difficult to completely lose a sense of direction on
a 


--- Page 53 ---
sunny day. But an overcast day is something else.
With no sun to guide us, we can get mixed up very 
easily. A compass will give the right direction every
time.
A compass is a simple device. It is a steel needle,
magnetized so that one end will always point to the 
earth's magnetic pole which lies a thousand miles
south of the true North Pole and a little west of the
hundred-degree meridian. Some compasses use a
magnetized disc rather than a needle.
CHOOSING A COMPASS
Although compasses can be used for navigation and
survey work, the outdoorsman's basic interest lies in
keeping on a straight course to some distant point
and then coming back again. For this, a small hand-
held compass with a swing needle or a disc is
adequate. Such compasses come in many styles. The
more 
sophisticated ones have needles that float in oil to
dampen their swinging and have sights for taking 
headings. Others have levers which allow the needle
to be taken off the pivot when the compass is not 
being used. I think that the very simple compasses
are not wise choices for the serious outdoorsman. 
They are frequently chosen because they are small and
inexpensive. A good compass, such as the Sylva 
and others in its class, can be used for fairly
sophisticated work. These are sturdy and dependable.
For 
approximately $15 to $20, they are a good life
insurance policy.
All magnetic compasses react to iron and steel, and
other magnets, including other compasses. If you are 
carrying something made of iron - a rifle, a knife,
or a belt buckle - it can throw the needle off. A
simple 
test can be conducted to check for this. Simply place
the compass on a low stump and walk away a few 


--- Page 54 ---
steps, giving the needle time to come to a full stop.
As you turn, watch the needle to see if it swings 
towards you as you approach. If it does, you must
find out what is causing the needle to deviate and
get 
rid of it whenever you take a compass reading.
USING MAP AND COMPASS
--- Page 31 ---
Since the compass needle points to the magnetic pole,
you must compensate for the difference between 
the positions of the true North Pole and the magnetic
north. This difference is called declination and it 
varies from nearly zero degrees to twenty-five
degrees east or west depending on what part of the 
continent the reading is being taken from. The near
zero degrees applies if the reading is taken when the
magnetic north and the true north are in line.
However, the only time declination is of concern is
when 
you are trying to follow a map that has both
magnetic-variance lines and grid lines based on the
true 
north. Declination needs to be known for navigation.
Both Geodetic Survey and U.S. Coast maps show 
magnetic variance as dotted lines and grid lines as
solid lines. Declination is always given in degrees 
east and west. But more about this later.
The elementary way of using a compass is as a
direction finder.
No one should venture into a wilderness area without
a map, a good compass, and a knowledge of how 
to use both.
To do this, you must simply wait until the needle
stops, turn the dial until the north arrow and the
needle 
are aligned, and then use whatever bearing will bring
you to your destination. In such elementary 


--- Page 55 ---
compassing, declination is ignored. However, this
technique works well only when short distances are 
involved or when the objective is large such as a
road or a river and you don't care where you hit it.
A 
variation of this technique can also be used to reach
an objective that is visible only at times. In this
case 
you simply take a compass heading and use it whenever
you lose sight of the objective.
However, for more sophisticated compassing such as
hitting a bay on a small lake many miles away, a 
map is needed on which the location of the camp is
pinpointed. The technique here depends on the type 
of compass.
Determining a course with a simple compass:
1. Draw a line from your starting point to the
objective.
2. If the map has no north-south line running across
your intended line of travel, then draw one by 
joining two points of the same longitude.
3. Place a protractor along the north-south line with
the center point at the junction of your path of
travel 
and the north-south line.
4. Read the bearing of the path of travel in degrees
at the outer margin of the protractor. Let us say
that it 
is eighty degrees.
5. Now you must convert the map's true north bearing
to a magnetic north bearing by applying the 
declination shown on the map. Let us assume that the
declination is ten degrees E. Then the bearing you 
have to follow to reach your objective is seventy
degrees E the declination (ten degrees E) minus the 
--- Page 32 ---
reading of your path of travel as shown by the
protractor (eighty degrees).


--- Page 56 ---
Determining a course with a Sylva or other good
quality compass:
1. Place your map on a flat, level surface. If you
wish, you can draw a line from the objective to the 
starting point, but this is not necessary.
2. Align the transparent plate of your compass along
the path of travel so that the line of sight is
pointing 
in that direction.
3. Turn the compass until the lines on the housing
are parallel to the north-south lines on the map. If
the 
map does not have north-south lines, you will have to
draw one crossing your path of travel. The north 
arrow on the housing will now be pointing to true
north.
4. Turn the compass housing the number of degrees of
declination marked on the map. (If the 
declination is east, this means a clockwise turn; if
the declination is west, an anti-clockwise turn.) The
index pointer now reads the magnetic bearing of the
path of travel.
5. To travel the line of direction required, turn the
whole compass without moving the housing so that 
the north end of the needle points over the north end
of the engraved arrow. The course to travel will be 
the line of sight or the direction of the sides of
the transparent plate.
Occasionally someone gets lost in spite of having a
compass and knowing how to use it, usually because 
the traveler lacked confidence in the compass. He
"knew" that the compass was wrong and that his sense 
of direction was right. Compasses seldom lie. They
may be affected by something outside the magnetic 
influence, but that's up to the compassman to
discover ahead of time. The compassman may also make 
mistakes. If he reads the headings incorrectly, he
cannot blame the compass for getting him lost.
Learning how to use a compass can be great fun. The


--- Page 57 ---
way to start is in territory that you know. If you 
can follow bearings with good accuracy in familiar
country, you are ready for the wilderness.
No one should go into an unfamiliar wilderness area
without a good map. For canoe tripping, a map with 
a scale of two miles to one inch is fine. For hiking,
a map with a larger scale is better, preferably one 
with contour lines. Familiarize yourself with the map
first. Look at the topographical features that you 
will encounter along your route or path of travel.
Learn the legend. To protect your map from moisture, 
cover it with clear, selfadhesive plastic sheeting or
spray it with a clear plastic spray. There are also 
plastic map cases available which allow the map to be
folded so that the sections that are in use are 
visible. These are a good idea on any trip.
WILDERNESS MAPS
Topographical maps can be a tremendous asset to any
outdoorsman. A topo map is different from a road 
map because it shows the features of the land - the
topography. Also, it shows the type of vegetation,
old 
--- Page 33 ---
logging roads, foot trails, cabins, mining and lumber
camps, power lines, streams, swamps, and springs. 
By studying a topo map, an outdoorsman can get a good
picture of what an area looks like and what he 
can expect to find there.
Of all the millions of words that have been written
giving advice to outdoorsmen on virtually every form 
of outdoor recreation, surprisingly little has been
said about the usefulness of topographical maps. I 
would no more dream of going on a wilderness trip of
any sort - fishing, hunting, backpacking, 
canoeing, ski touring, or snow mobiling - without a
topographical map of the area, than I would of going 
without an ax. The topographical map will not only
show me landmarks, help me with navigation, and 


--- Page 58 ---
tell me what kind of terrain lies ahead, but it will
give me an idea of the type of wildlife and fish
habitats 
I might encounter. Marshes may hold waterfowl. Small,
spring-fed mountain streams and ponds may 
have trout. The marshy lakes of northern Canada are
ideal places to look for moose during summer and 
early fall because moose like to feed on aquatic
vegetation. The list of possibilities is endless.
Even in settled farm country, topographical maps are
of immense value. I have used them to locate tiny 
hidden trout streams, small marshes where other
waterfowlers are seldom encountered, likely looking 
woodcock covers along streams, and moist swales, and
high hardwood ridges with interesting 
snowshoeing and ski touring possibilities. By using
the topo maps first and scouting the area, I am able 
to get away from the hordes of other outdoorsmen by
finding little pockets of woodlands tucked away 
out of sight from roads.
The key to using a topographical map lies in learning
the symbols and codes. They tell the story of what 
actually lies on the ground. Generally the maps cover
one quadrangle, one-quarter degree of latitude and 
longitude. The scale of the map can vary, but the
larger the scale, the more detail the map shows and
the 
more valuable it is. The most useful scale is a
seven-and-ahalf-minute quadrangle series. On this
scale, 
one inch on the map represents about two thousand
feet on the ground.
Topographical maps in the United States can be
obtained from the Map Information Office, U.S. 
Geological Survey, Washington, D.C. 20244, for states
east of the Mississippi. Maps of states west of 
the Mississippi can be obtained from the Map
Information Office, U.S. Geological Survey, Federal 
Center, Denver, Colorado 80225. In Canada, topo maps
can be obtained from the Map Distribution 


--- Page 59 ---
Office, Department of Mines and Technical Service,
Ottawa, Ontario.
First you will need an index sheet for the state or
province you are interested in, telling what maps are
available. With this index, you will get instructions
as to how to order individual maps. You can then 
select the maps for the area you want and order them.
Topographical maps are quite inexpensive.
Topographical maps for national parks can be
purchased overthe-counter at all park headquarters.
It is 
also possible to purchase topographical maps of
national forests in the United States at the U.S.
Forest 
Service Regional Center in Atlanta, Georgia;
Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Albuquerque, New Mexico; 
Denver, Colorado; Ogden, Utah; Missoula, Montana; San
Francisco, California; Portland, Oregon; and 
Juneau, Alaska.
--- Page 34 ---
One last tip. When maps are requested by mail, you
should allow about four weeks for delivery, so plan 
your trip early and order your maps well ahead of
time.
CHAPTER 7
OPTICS FOR THE OUTDOORSMAN
If someone were to ask me what piece of outdoor
equipment gives me the greatest pleasure, I would 
have no difficulty in answering binoculars. Aside
from my knives, binoculars are the only piece of 
equipment I use year around. Canoes, tents,
snowshoes, fishing rods, shotguns, and rifles all
have 
seasonal uses, but not binoculars. I generally carry
a pair of binoculars, or at least have a pair handy,
on 
almost every outdoor ramble.


--- Page 60 ---
When the fishing has hit the doldrums, binoculars
have never failed to provide me with entertainment. I
have watched ospreys fishing, beavers repairing their
dams, and minks hunting for a meal along a 
lakeshore. In the blue bird days of fall, I have
pleasantly idled away many hours in a duck blind 
watching marsh birds and other creatures. And more
than a little of my reputation as a big-game hunter 
is the result of using binoculars. On a big-game
hunt, I consider binoculars to be much more
beneficial 
than the 'scope on my rifle. As a bird watcher and a
wildlife photographer, I have found them to be 
indispensable.
Curiously enough, binoculars do not actually extend
your range of vision beyond what you can see with 
the naked eye. In other words, they don't help you
see farther. What they do is make distant objects
look 
more detailed, larger, and clearer. They do this not
only by magnifying, but also by gathering and 
transmitting light through the lenses and prisms to
the eye.
BINOCULAR SAVVY
Magnification The magnification is one of the
principal considerations in selecting binoculars.
There is a 
tendency among inexperienced outdoorsmen to select
binoculars with high magnificafion. The theory is 
that if it is higher in power, it has to be better.
This is wrong. Binoculars of high power are difficult
to 
hold steady; the tremors of your hand are magnified
in proportion to the magnification of the binoculars.
Binoculars of a moderate power - 7X or 8X - are the
best allaround choice. Although binoculars can be 
had with 16X or 20X magnification, these require
tripods for satisfactory use. About the highest 
practical magnification for an outdoorsman is 10X.


--- Page 61 ---
Brightness The relative brightness or the "ability to
gather light" is another important feature to
consider 
in binoculars. Although magnification plays a part in
this, a bigger role is played by the diameter of the 
objective lens. Generally speaking, the wider the
objective lens, the greater the relative brightness. 
However, magnification can negate the relative
brightness. For example, binoculars of the
specifications 
10X50 and 7X50 have the same diameter-objective lens,
but the 7X50 have higher relative brightness. 
Binoculars with very wide objective lenses are
generally bulky and heavy and should not be selected 
where compactness and weight are important factors.
--- Page 35 ---
Field of View The field of view is the width or
diameter of the circular view that you see through
the 
binoculars. It is always measured at a thousand
yards. A wider field of view allows the viewer to
take in 
more territory without moving the glasses. A wide
field of view is an asset, particularly when viewing 
fast moving objects at close range. Again, the higher
the magnification, the lower the field of view. 
There are binoculars on the market with extra-wide
fields of view. These sell at higher prices than the 
same binoculars with standard fields of view.
Focusing There are two different focusing systems in
binoculars - central focusing and individual 
focusing. In binoculars with individual focusing,
each eyepiece is focused individually according to a 
calibrated scale on it. With central focusing, both
eyepieces are focused simultaneously by turning a 
knurled knob between the barrels. On most such
binoculars, the right eyepiece has a scale for
adjusting 


--- Page 62 ---
the visual difference between your two eyes. Very few
people have the same vision in both eyes.
The advantage of centrally focused binoculars is the
ease and convenience of focusing. Most high 
quality binoculars manufactured today have central
focusing. Individual-focus binoculars are fine if
only 
one person is using them because the focus will not
be changed. They are somewhat simpler in 
construction, hence they are less expensive.
Coating On high quality binoculars, the lenses are
always coated with magnesium fluoride on the air-to-
glass surface. This coating eliminates reflections
and glare and allows greater light transmission.  
Reflected light bounces off the prisms in the
binoculars, reaching the eye as haze and making the
image 
less sharp.
Alignment The barrels of binoculars must be in
perfect alignment, or your eyes won't be able to make
one image out of two. You can safely assume that any
new pair of binoculars, when purchased, will be 
in perfect alignment. However, with cheap and flimsy
binoculars, the alignment can change with use. 
When a change in alignment is only slight, your eyes
can compensate for it, but using non-aligned 
binoculars will cause you eyestrain and headaches.
The best protection against non-alignment lies in the
reputation of the manufacturer and his guarantee. All
high quality binoculars are sold with a guarantee of 
anywhere from five years to a lifetime.
Definition The definition - the clarity and sharpness
- of binoculars changes from the center to the edge 
of the viewing field. No binoculars have perfect
center-to-edge definition. However, in binoculars
with 
good optics, the edge definition has deteriorated to
such a low point that it is almost unnoticeable. When


--- Page 63 ---
purchasing binoculars, compare the edge definition in
binoculars of different price brackets by focusing 
on a flat surface such as a wall.
Coloring High quality binoculars are always corrected
for colors most noticeable to the eyes. Look 
through binoculars at a dark object against a bright
sky to see if you get rainbows or strong color
fringes. 
These color fringes impair good definition.
Other Features When purchasing good binoculars
examine their general appearance. Make sure that the 
--- Page 36 ---
binoculars are well finished. See that the focusing
mechanism and the hinges work smoothly. Look at 
the external covering on the barrels to ascertain
that it is attached well. If you can afford only low-
priced 
binoculars, shake them to see if any screws or prisms
are loose inside. Look at the external parts to see 
how well they are cemented together. Give the
objective lens a tap with your knuckle to make sure
that 
it is mounted solidly. Read the manufacturer's
guarantee and compare it with the guarantees of 
competitive brands.
SELECTING BINOCULARS
Buying binoculars can be a baffling business. There
are a great many models to choose from and in 
many price ranges. Binoculars with seemingly similar
features can vary as much as two hundred dollars 
in price. And then there is the question of
magnification and the diameter of the objective lens.
Almost 
everyone knows that binoculars designated as 7X35 or
10X50 means that the binoculars rated as 7X will 
magnify seven times, while those rated at 10X will
magnify ten times. The figures thirty-five and fifty 


--- Page 64 ---
are the diameters of the objective lenses in
millimeters.
The best all-around binoculars for the outdoors are
7X35. Such a glass is easy to hold without undue 
hand tremor. It has good light-gathering abilities
for forest use on dark days. It is an excellent
choice for 
bird watching, hunting, and even for spectator
sports.
Another good choice is 8X30. It offers a bit more
magnification. but less light-gathering ability. It
is 
suitable for big-game hunting and bird watching.
Another popular glass is 9X35. This is a binocular
for 
open country mountains and plains. It is not as easy
to hold steady as a 7X35 and is best used when the 
viewer can sit down and brace his elbows against his
upright knees to steady his hands.
Binoculars such as 10X50 are for long-range viewing,
but they are too bulky and heavy if you have 
other gear to carry as well. For night use and for
navigation, 7X50 are the best bet. These binoculars
are 
also bulky and heavy, but they have tremendous light-
gathering ability.
On the other hand, binoculars such as 6X25 are a
little too small for general use. However, because of
their small size and lightness they can be shoved
into the pocket of a jacket and taken along when 
bulkier and heavier binoculars would be left behind.
This is why I own such a pair.
Most high quality binoculars today are made in the
United States, West Germany, and Japan. The only 
American manufacturer is Bausch and Lomb. Their
binoculars are expensive, but of outstanding quality.
The 9X35 Bausch and Lomb binoculars are the choice of
many knowledgeable mountain hunters. One 


--- Page 65 ---
can hardly go wrong in choosing binoculars by Bausch
and Lomb.
Three outstanding German makes are Zeiss, Leitz, and
Hensoldt. Zeiss lenses are world renowned and 
their binoculars are excellent. Zeiss makes a very
fine 8X30 binocular crated entirely in rubber for 
maximum water resistance and protection against non-
alignment if the binoculars are accidentally 
dropped. The rubber absorbs most of the shock.
--- Page 37 ---
Leitz, the manufacturers of Leica cameras, make
several models of roofprismatic binoculars. These 
Leitz Trinovid binoculars have their prisms arranged
in a different way which makes them very slim and 
light. Indeed, Leitz binoculars are one-third to one-
half lighter and one-quarter to one-third less bulky 
than binoculars with comparable magnification and
objective lenses of the conventional Potro prism 
design. The Trinovids are made in 7X35, 8X32, and
10X40. The 10X40's are smaller and lighter than 
conventional 7X35's. The only hangup with these Leitz
binoculars is their price - over four hundred 
dollars for the 10X40's. The other powers are a
little less expensive.
Excellent binoculars are made in Japan. Indeed, the
Japanese have captured most of the low and medium-
priced binocular market. Such camera manufacturers as
Pentax and Nikon both make good, 
mediumpriced binoculars. But perhaps the best known
brand is Bushnell.
Bushnell glasses are excellent, and are made in many
styles ranging from low to medium in price. I have 
used Bushnell binoculars in 7X35 and 6X25 with great
satisfaction. Other Japanese manufacturers are 
Tasco and Swift. Low-priced Japanese-made binoculars
can be had for fifty dollars, while the medium-
priced binoculars range from about one hundred to one
hundred and fifty dollars.


--- Page 66 ---
OTHER OPTICS
Some outdoorsmen may find other optical instruments
useful. For example, the rock hound and the 
botany bug may need a magnifying lens for evaluation
and identification of specimens. A serious bird 
watcher and a big-game hunter in the mountains may
want a spotting 'scope. These are powerful 
instruments with magnifications ranging from 20X to
30X.
The criteria for selecting spotting 'scopes are
essentially the same as for selecting binoculars.
Spotting 
'scopes cannot be hand-held for viewing efficiency.
They must be mounted on a tripod which will 
elevate them to a standing position or to a prone
position. Bird watchers will prefer a tall tripod
such as 
one used in photography. Big game hunters generally
prefer a prone tripod because it is shorter and 
lighter and because hunters prefer to remain hidden
and inconspicuous as they peer over mountain 
ledges.
CHAPTER 8
THE OUTDOORSMAN'S KNIFE
The knife is one of man's earliest tools. Its history
goes back to the stirrings of time when our ancient 
ancestors first used a sharp piece of stone to cut
the skin and flesh from their quarry. But it was not
until 
the Stone Age, and perhaps even the Bronze Age, that
the knife became a weapon. Over the centuries 
the knife has changed, but its use has not. To an
outdoorsman a knife at times is an indispensable
tool. I 
would rather go on a wilderness trip without a pair
of pants than without a knife.
Essentially, outdoorsmen's knives can be divided into
two general types: sheath knives, sometimes 
called belt knives, and folding knives, also called
pocket knives. These terms are easily understood. 


--- Page 67 ---
Sheath knives are carried in a sheath, usually on the
belt. The blades of folding knives fold into the 
--- Page 38 ---
handle. Some longer and heavier folding knives are
also carried folded in a sheath.
Folding knives are nearly always general-purpose
knives. They have no specialized tasks. Sheath
knives, 
on the other hand, come in different styles and are
for different purposes. The most common is still a 
sort of general purpose knife, but we also have
filleting knives with long, thin, flexible blades;
skinning 
knives with broad curved blades; caping knives with
thin, fine blades and blunted points for caping or 
skinning out the heads of big-game animals. There is
a special dressing knife with a short blade and a 
heavy knob on the point for dressing big-game animals
which lessens the risk of puncturing the 
intestines. You can even buy an Eskimo oo-you, a
skinning knife with a semicircular blade.
Moreover, when one considers styles; shapes of
blades; styles, shapes, and materials of handles;
types of 
steel; and methods of manufacture, the choice is
staggering and at times bewildering. Choosing a knife
is not difficult once you have established some basic
criteria. By far the most important consideration is 
the knife's purpose. The next may be cost. The third
criterion may be personal preference - the style of 
the blade or design of the handle. To some people,
this criterion may be even more important than that 
of cost.
But the most important factor when choosing a knife
is quality. Often the high price of an item is not 
necessarily indicative of a good product. In the case
of knives, however, it generally is. There is a big 


--- Page 68 ---
difference in quality between a fine, custom-crafted
knife made by one of two-dozen custom knifesmiths 
and a $4.95 knife that you may find at the sporting
goods counter of a discount department store.
Signs of good quality are not always easy to detect
in knives. In sheath knives, look at the way the 
handle is attached to the blade. Bolt rivets running
through the handle are an excellent way of keeping 
the handle firmly attached. A bolt which is part of
the knife blade is-also excellent. Beware of 
embellishment on the blade. It is useless and may
have been put there to distract the purchaser from 
flaws and poor quality. There should be no gaps where
the guard meets the blade. The finish should 
shine. The lines should be clean and smooth. The
knife should feel and look solid, even if it is a 
delicately bladed caping knife.
A good hint of a knife's quality lies in its sheath.
A manufacturer or maker of a good knife will not 
supply it with a sheath of poor workmanship and
quality. However, not all sheaths of high quality
knives 
are practical for field use, so choose one that can
stand wear and tear. When you see what appears to be 
a good quality knife in a cheap and shoddy sheath,
don't gamble. Leave it alone.
A good quality folding knife is easier to recognize
than a sheath knife. Look for a smooth spring action 
when the knife is opened and closed. The blade should
click audibly into the open and closed positions. 
When a folding knife is closed, the point of the
blade should be covered by the sides of the handle. 
When the blade is opened, the blade should not move
from side to side. Such a movement indicates a 
loose pivot rivet. The handle, or rather the covering
on the folding knife's body that serves as a handle, 
should be firmly attached. If it looks rather flimsy,
don't risk buying it.
To fully understand the underlying features of
knives, one should know a little about how knives are


--- Page 69 ---
--- Page 39 ---
made. Essentially a piece of good steel of about one-
percent carbon content is heated until it is a
bright, 
glowing red. It is then quenched in a liquid bath.
The fluid in the bath varies from maker to maker. The
next step can vary. The blade is either forged or
milled, depending on what the maker believes produces
a superior blade. Outstanding knife makers such as
Randall, Moran, and Ruana insist on forging, while 
equally outstanding knife makers such as Seguine,
Olsen, and Gerber mill away the excess metal. Both 
techniques make good knives. The important point in
producing a knife is the tempering of the blade. 
All high quality knives are well tempered.
When buying a knife, don't take much stock of
promotional propaganda such as "special alloys", 
"miracle steel", and so on. High-carbon steel is
high-carbon steel. High-carbon stainless steel is as
good 
or almost as good as plain high-carbon steel, but it
is more difficult to work with. This is one reason
why 
in two knives of the same quality, the knife made of
stainless steel will be more expensive. Stay away 
from inexpensive stainless-steel knives.
The type of steel used by the various makers and
manufacturers of knives varies. Randall uses Swedish 
high carbon. American, German, or British high-carbon
steel is just as good, but the Swedes are famous 
for their steel so it is part of the image. Ruana
uses a chrome-vanadium alloy. Buck knives have a fair
amount of chromium in them which makes them rust-
resistant. Morseth makes his knife blades 


--- Page 70 ---
laminated a hard edge with softer steel on the sides
of the blade.
One of the best and easiest ways to ensure that the
knife you buy is good, is to purchase knives made by 
well-known knife makers. Essentially there are four
classes of knife makers. First there are the custom 
knifesmiths. The knives that these men make are
entirely hand made, sometimes requiring up to twelve 
hours of highly skilled hand labor for a knife with
special features. Needless to say, custom knives are 
expensive but, in my opinion, they are well worth the
investment for an outdoorsman who uses a knife 
regularly. A good generaluse, custom-made outdoor
knife by a top knifesmith can be purchased even 
today for about $50. Top custom knife makers are
Randall, Moran, Draper, Boone, Cooper, Hibben, 
Loveless, Morseth, Seguine, Carey, and others. A
comprehensive list of knife makers and their
addresses 
can be obtained from A. G. Russell, P.O. Box 474,
Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701.
In many cases you can obtain a general-use outdoor
knife from these people on short notice. Most likely 
they will have what you want in stock. However, if
you want a knife of your own design or with some 
special feature, you will have to wait up to eighteen
months in some cases. Most knife makers are far 
behind in their orders. Despite the seemingly high
prices, custom knife makers don't get rich - the
profit 
margin is too small and the price of skilled labor is
high. Many of them have alternate sources of 
income. Sequine, the Alaskan knife maker, finds that
the only time he can make a profit is in winter 
when he can hire help at a reasonable price; Randall,
the Florida knifesmith, owns orange groves and 
other enterprises; Carey, the custom knife maker in
the fishing village of Port Stanley on Ontario's
shore 
of Lake Erie, is a machinist.


--- Page 71 ---
The second class of outdoor knives is made by
production manufacturing techniques. Their prices, of
course, are lower than those of the custom makers,
but their knives are also of good quality. Buck, 
Olsen, Gerber, Browning, Colt, and Puma are well-
known makers of such knives. Browning and Colt 
--- Page 40 ---
are distributors, and who actually manufactures their
knives, I don't know. Prices start about $15 for the 
smaller models and run to about $45. What surprises
me is that Gerber and Buck can turn out knives of 
such good quality at such low prices.
The next class of knives are true mass-production
knives, but good quality is still maintained. Such 
knives will cost from about $10 to $15. They are a
good buy for a man who feels that this is all he can 
afford. Respected brand names of such knives are
Marble, Case, Western, Schrade-Walden, and 
Normark.
The quality control of production or mass-production
knives is not as high as that of the custom knife 
makers, who carefully inspect knives during every
stage of their manufacture. Thus it is at times 
possible to buy a massproduced knife that has slipped
through the quality control and is below standard. 
When this happens, you can pretty well count on the
manufacturer to give you a replacement. These 
manufacturers stand behind their products, but the
manufacturers of the really cheap knives never do. If
they did, they could not stay in business.
WHICH KNIFE FOR WHAT?
As I said earlier, the ultimate choice of an outdoor
knife depends on its purpose. A canoe tripper or a 
small-game hunter will find a knife with a three-inch
blade ample for his needs. Such a knife will be 
useful for most chores he will have to perform. A


--- Page 72 ---
three-inch blade is quite long enough for making a
fire 
stick from a dry white pine bow, for dressing out a
game bird, or for cleaning a fish, even a fifteen-
pound lake trout.
Such a knife can be either a sheath or a folding
knife, depending on personal preference. There are 
several fine folding knives on the market with blades
of that length. However, one of the problems with 
folding knives is that they are usually carried in
the pocket where they can be lost easily. Also, the 
sturdier and heavier folding knives are too heavy and
bulky for pocket use. For this reason, some folding 
knives do come with a belt case, which is an
excellent idea. Another good idea is to attach a
leather loop 
to a snap swivel. A belt is run through the loop and
the snap swivel is attached to a ring or keeper on
the 
knife, providing, of course, the knife has one.
Should the knife fall out of your pocket, the loop
and 
swivel will prevent its loss.
For wider, but still general outdoor use, a knife
with a four-inch or four-and-ahalf-inch blade is more
versatile. Such a knife will perform almost anything
that the smaller bladed knife will and then some. 
True, you may feel a bit foolish dressing out an
eight-inch brook trout with such a big knife, but on
the 
other hand, a four-and-a-half-inch blade is long
enough for filleting a twenty-pound northern pike. It
also is a bit better for dressing out a moose or an
elk; not that a three-inch blade won't do the job in
a 
pinch. I know that it will, because I have done it
more than once. But a four-and-a-half-inch blade is a


--- Page 73 ---
better choice. In fact, for dressing moose and elk, a
five-inch blade may be even better. However, in my 
opinion, a blade longer than five inches is not
needed. Any woodsman will tell you that the mark of a
greenhorn is a long-bladed knife.
--- Page 41 ---
Of course, for special tasks, you should have a
special knife. The most common specialty knife for an
outdoorsman is a filleting knife. Such a knife should
have a long, flexible blade. Although the flesh of a 
fish is soft and easy to cut, a filleting knife must
be able to take a sharp edge. Filleting a fish is
actually a 
fairly precise task. 
Another specialty knife is a skinning knife. Such a
knife generally has a broad, curved blade. Basically
it 
is designed for skinning fur-bearing animals. For
skinning deer or other biggame animals, a skinning 
knife is not really needed. A caping knife, as was
explained earlier, is a specialized skinning knife
used 
for caping out the heads of big-game animals.
Generally caping knives have broad, thin blades. 
Although any smallbladed knife can be used for
caping, the special knives make the job easier and 
perhaps present less of a risk of nicking through the
headskin. The average outdoorsman does not need a 
skinning or a caping knife. On the other hand, a big-
game hunter who usually hunts without a guide may 
find a caping knife very handy if he ever bags a head
of mounting size.
Every well-designed knife has a certain visual
excellence. The design may be fairly conventional, as
in 
the Ruana or Buck knives; it may be subtly classical,


--- Page 74 ---
like the Morseth deer knife; or very contemporary, 
like the knives of Gerber. But beyond the looks,
there is also a feel. A knife must feel comfortable
in 
your hand. If it feels awkward and clumsy, don't buy
it. Look for another design or style.
One thing I would advise is that you avoid too many
gadgets on your knife. My remarks here are 
directed more towards folding knives. Scissors,
screwdrivers, and the kitchen sink may be fine for a 
knife designed for the Swiss Army, but such a knife
is not really needed in the outdoors. Usually gadgets
on such knives do not perform the tasks they were
meant for, or at least they don't perform them well.
I 
prefer a pair of good scissors in my first-aid kit
and a set of small and handy screwdrivers with my 
guncleaning equipment. The only gadget I think is
useful is a bird-gutting hook, seen on some of the 
European folding knives.
Aside from knife design, consider the handle. Handles
contribute to the feel and the look of a knife, as 
well as to the overall design. Knife handles are made
from exotic woods, staghorn, Micarta, leather, 
metal, synthetics, and even ivory. I have even seen
knife handles made from the feet of the small 
European roe deer. Such handles give me the willies.
They were not meant for outdoor use - for wet or 
even, at times, blood-covered hands.
Any of the other materials I have mentioned make
suitable handles. Those on Buck knives are made of 
epoxy. Gerber knives have cast aluminum handles. When
I first heard of them I thought they would be 
slippery when wet or when grasped by a wet or bloody
hand, but this is not the case. These handles are 
well designed for a solid grip under all conditions.
Randall makes knife handles according to the 
customer's preference - from ivory to leather.
Leather, wood, and staghorn are probably the most 


--- Page 75 ---
common materials for knife handles. They are all good
when well made, and they all look good.
HOW MANY KNIVES?
You may need more than one knife - a knife for each
major task. This, of course, depends entirely on 
--- Page 42 ---
what you do or want to do in the out-of-doors. A
canoe tripper may need only one knife. A folding
knife 
with a three-inch blade or even a sheath knife with a
four-inch blade will do. The same applies to 
campers and hikers. A small-game hunter will never
need more than one knife - one with a three-inch 
blade. A deer hunter would find such a knife adequate
as well, unless he wanted to cut through the rib 
cage and quarter the animal. A larger, heavier knife
would be needed for this purpose, but a light ax, 
hatchet, or meat saw would be even better. A big-game
hunter should have a knife with a fourto-five-
inch blade and possibly a caping knife. A fisherman
should ideally have two knives - one for dressing 
fish and one for filleting. However, both tasks can
be performed with a thin-bladed knife with a four to 
five-inch blade.
From this we can see that an outdoorsman with many
interests may need three or even four different 
knives. Indeed, when going on a long trip into the
wilderness, one should carry a spare knife for
general 
use. More knives are lost than ever wear out or
break.
KNIFE CARE
A knife is easy to care for; with proper care any
knife of good quality can last a lifetime. It should
be 
stored in a dry place, but never in its sheath,
because the leather may have impurities in it which
can 


--- Page 76 ---
cause corrosion pits on the blade of the knife. When
a knife is being stored for a long period, its blade 
should be lightly oiled.
Whenever a knife gets wet, it should be dried as soon
as possible. This includes stainless steel knives. 
Water does not do wooden or leather handles any good
at all. For this reason, dirty knives should be 
cleaned with a wet cloth, but not actually immersed
in water unless absolutely necessary. Another major 
sin is the actual misuse of knives. Knives are meant
for cutting. They are not meant to be used as 
hatchets, screwdrivers, or can openers. You cannot
expect a knife to keep a proper, let alone a sharp, 
edge, if you mistreat it.
SHARPENING A KNIFE
A dull knife is a useless knife. A dull knife is also
dangerous more strength has to be exerted to make a 
dull knife cut, sometimes causing it to slip. A cut
with a dull knife is more hazardous than a cut with a
sharp knife because a dull knife tends to tear a
wound, destroying more cells and making a wider gash 
that takes longer to heal. The cut of a sharp knife
is finer. Less tissue is destroyed. The cut doesn't
bleed 
as much, heals faster, and is less prone to become
infected.
A properly cared-for knife is never allowed to get
too dull. A very dull knife is much harder to
sharpen, 
and its edge will become ruined much more quickly.
Sharpening a knife is not difficult. A hardbladed 
knife may take longer to sharpen, but it stays sharp
indefinitely. A knife with a soft blade sharpens 
quickly and becomes dull just as quickly. A soft
blade is a mark of a cheap knife.
When sharpening a knife, there are two considerations
to take into account. Are you just touching up the 
edge or are you putting on a new edge? The latter
should be done on a table, bench, or some other firm 


--- Page 77 ---
--- Page 43 ---
support, and on a big oil stone. Touching up can be
done in the field and usually with a small pocket 
stone.
To sharpen a knife, lift the back of the blade so
that the blade is at a twenty-degree angle. Now
stroke 
the blade across the stone from the back to the
point, first on one side and then on the other. Bear
down 
on the knife with some force, but make sure that you
maintain the twenty-degree angle. Light strokes 
will not achieve much. You may think that you are
sharpening a knife that way, but you are not. When 
the edge no longer reflects light and you can shave a
hair off your arm, you know that it is sharp. For 
those who feel that sharpening a knife is a difficult
task - despite these instructions - Buck makes a 
handy gadget which clamps onto the blade to maintain
the proper angle. With this gadget the blade is 
then swept across the stone.
If your knife produces a "wire edge" (you will see it
when you hold the knife up), you will need to hone 
it on a strop or on a piece of heavy cardboard. Just
draw the edge backwards across the strop or 
cardboard on both sides of the blade until the "wire
edge" disappears. For touching up an edge, hold the 
knife and lightly run the stone over the edge at a
twenty-degree angle, but don't bear down.
For touching up, any small, pocket carborundum stone
is fine. For real sharpening, a big oil stone is 
needed - at least eight inches in length and
preferably twelve inches. The oil stone must be
firmly 
anchored to the bench. The stone should have a medium
and a fine side. Be sure to use plenty of light 
machine or honing oil or some other lubricant to
prevent the pores of the stone from sludging up. A.


--- Page 78 ---
G. 
Russell's Arkansas oil stones are the best I know.
With a little experience you will find that
sharpening a 
knife is not at all difficult.
Outdoorsmen generally think of knives as mere tools,
something they work with. And like every 
craftsman, they take pride in their tools. But is
this all there is to knives? I think not. There is
something 
stronger here, invisible and perhaps a bit mystical.
It is one of those atavistic feelings that comes from
deep in a man's soul. The knife was one of the first
implements that separated us - made us different 
from the other animals. It contributed to making us
what we have been and what we are.
CHAPTER 9
THE ART OF AXMANSHIP
I enjoy chopping wood. Why exactly, I don't know.
Probably it is a symbolic sort of satisfaction, a 
spiritual rebellion against our mechanical age. It is
unlikely that the kids playing street hockey outside 
my window as I write this, will ever know how to use
an ax. When my father was a boy, one of his daily 
chores was to bring in a bundle of kindling for the
kitchen stove and the stove in the parlor. By the
time I 
was in my teens, when you wanted the house to be a
little warmer, you turned up the thermostat. Yet I 
learned to use an ax despite the handicaps of modern
life. I recognized early that axmanship was 
synonymous with, and a part of, woodsmanship. I
believe more strongly than ever that anyone who calls
himself an outdoorsman, but doesn't know how to use
an ax, is a sham. For those of you who grew up 
with a thermostat and an oil furnace instead of a
wood stove, but want to learn how to use an ax, here
is 


--- Page 79 ---
how.
--- Page 44 ---
CHOOSING AN AX
The first step in learning to use an ax is to choose
a proper one. My recommendation for all-around 
outdoor use is a single-bitted ax weighing about
three pounds, with a thirty-inch handle. Stay away
from 
axes that are much heavier than this because they are
meant for heavy-duty wood chopping and little 
else. Also stay away from twobitted axes - ones with
two blades. They are loggers' axes. The three-
pound ax I am recommending can be used not only for
chopping wood, but also for driving tent pegs 
and for dozens of other chores around camp. If weight
is a factor, you can go to a lighter ax, two-and-a-
quarter or two-and-a-half pounds, with a shorter
handle of about twenty-four inches. Such an ax is a 
better bet than a hatchet. It will do everything that
a hatchet will and more, but a person of smaller, 
lighter build may find a smaller and lighter ax more
manageable and more comfortable to use.
When buying an ax, don't skimp on quality just to
save a couple of dollars. That is poor economy. When 
choosing an ax, sight along the blade to make sure
that the handle is not warped or that the blade is
not 
set off too much from the center line of the handle.
Make sure that the head is attached securely to the 
handle by being firmly wedged.
Look the handle over carefully. Make sure that the
grain runs parallel to the sides. Avoid axes where
the 
grain in the handle twists too much. This could mean
serious structural weakness. The best ax handles 
are made of hickory. Never buy an ax with a
completely painted handle. Paint can hide flaws and 
weaknesses in the wood. Remember, an ax will last a


--- Page 80 ---
lifetime if you take care of it. Your choice should 
reflect this.
Every ax should have a leather sheath for the head,
not only for safety, but to prevent nicks on the 
cutting edge. Most axes, when they are bought, have
too thick a blade and the cutting edge has too quick 
a taper to cut well. It should be ground down a
little. If you do this on a power grindstone, keep
the blade 
cool by dipping it continuously in a bucket of water.
If you let it overheat, you will draw or ruin the 
temper. An ax can be sharpened quickly on an emery
wheel, but eventually this ruins the blade. Coarse 
sharpening can be done with a fine file. Then switch
to a coarse stone and finish sharpening with a 
medium stone. The best stone for ax-sharpening is a
round one. It has no sharp edges to rub through a 
packsack, so you can carry it with you whenever you
take the ax. An ax should never be left lying 
around. It can cause accidents or accidents can
happen to it. Keep it hung in its sheath or sink the
blade 
into the top of a stump.
The handle of the ax is its weak part. At home it is
easy to replace - all you have to do is buy a new
one, 
drive the stub out of the ax, insert the new handle,
and wedge it firmly onto the ax. But if your ax
handle 
breaks deep in the bush, that is a different matter.
Stones and hardwood pegs may be used to drive the 
broken stub of the old handle out. If this doesn't
work, you will have to bum the stub out. Bury the, ax
head up to the eye in loose earth. Build a fire
around it and keep burning until the stub bums off
and 
becomes loose enough to be driven out. To improvise a
temporary handle, use any hardwood. To drive 
the sap out of green wood to toughen it, roast the


--- Page 81 ---
wood in warm coals. This will season it somewhat.
--- Page 45 ---
CUTTING WITH AN AX
Now, let's fell a tree for firewood. The best wood is
a dead, standing tree. It is dry - seasoned - and
will 
burn well. Dead trees and branches lying on the
ground are generally damp and make smoky fires.
First, 
walk around the tree to determine which way it leans.
That is the direction you want to drop it, because 
it is easier. If there is a standing tree in that
direction that might hang it up, then plan to drop it
slightly to 
one side. Consider also the direction of the wind. It
is much easier to drop a tree with the wind than into
the wind. Dropping a tree cross wind represents no
major problem unless the wind is very strong.
Before starting, make sure that there are no
branches, small saplings, or brush within reach of
your ax. 
They could deflect your ax and cause an accident. The
secret in cutting with an ax lies in the grip. Grasp 
the helve - the old term for the handle - with both
hands close together near the butt. Touch the blade
of 
the ax to the tree to get the right distance. As you
raise the ax over your right shoulder, slide your
right 
hand up (providing you are right-handed) about three-
quarters of the way towards the head of the ax. As 
you bring the ax down, slide your right hand down the
handle until it touches your left hand. Strike so 
that the blade cuts into the tree at about a forty-
five degree angle to the grain. Don't attempt to put 
excessive force into the swing. You cannot get any
accuracy this way. The fastest chopping is achieved 


--- Page 82 ---
with many fast and accurate blows, not with brute
force.
The first notch is made near the bottom of the tree
on the side on which you want the tree to drop. Make 
the notch about half way through. Tyros generally
start by making their notches too narrow. Narrow 
notches make cutting difficult. A good rule of thumb
is to make the notch as wide as the diameter of the 
tree that you are cutting.
Your next notch should be a few (three or four)
inches above the first one and directly opposite it.
When 
the tree begins to fall, step away to one side of the
cut, not behind it. Should the top branches of the 
falling tree catch on another tree, the butt may snap
and fly backwards several feet. Many injuries have 
been caused by backward-flying butts.
The next task is to limb the tree. Stand on the
opposite side of the tree from which you want to
remove 
the limbs. In this way, if the ax glances off the
tree it will glance away from your legs. Work from
the 
butt to the top, chopping at the bottom side of the
branches. Limbing goes fastest this way, and it is 
easier to make the cuts flush with the trunk. The
next step is to cut off the crown. On small trees,
this can 
be done with one notch all the way through. Bigger
trees may require two notches, opposite one another, 
with each going half way.
To cut the trunk into usable lengths, simply chop two
notches half way through the trunk on opposite 
sides of each other as before. This is easier than
using one deep notch from the top down. You should 
always stand on the trunk with your feet spread wide
and chop between your feet. To split these pieces, 
use the butt section as a chopping block. Lean the
chunk to be split against your chopping block and 
strike a good hard blow on the upper end where the


--- Page 83 ---
piece is resting. If the halves are still too large,
split 
these the same wayinto quarters. Don't neglect the
larger branches for firewood. Cut these into desired 
--- Page 46 ---
lengths by holding them across the chopping block
with one hand and striking them at a slight angle 
with the ax. The chop should be delivered at the
center of your chopping block where the branch is 
firmly supported. To chop up kindling, always lay the
piece to be kindled horizontally across the 
chopping block, grasp it at the lower end, and strike
the top. Once the ax is embedded in the piece, you 
can slam it down vertically to complete the cut.
Never hold the piece to be kindled upright with one 
hand and chop with the other. That is an easy way to
cut your hand.
CHAPTER 10
CHAIN SAW TACTICS
Chain saws, particularly the small six-and-a-half
pound outdoorsmen's models, have become widely 
used tools. There are many reasons for this. The
biggest one is that the chain saw can perform many 
tasks quickly and easily, leaving time to enjoy more
leisurely outdoor pursuits.
Obviously, chain saws are taken into the outdoors
only where
their extra weight and the weight of the gasoline
needed to operate
them present no transportation problems. I use a
chain saw on many
automobile camping trips, but I would never take one
on a backpacking 
trip or on a canoe trip. Then my ax goes with me.
Indeed, I have an ax handy even when felling trees or
bucking logs with a chain saw. So do lumberjacks and
pulp cutters who use their chain saws to earn a 


--- Page 84 ---
living. Although I consider myself to be fairly handy
with a chain saw, I am far from being an expert. To 
write this chapter, I have sought the advice of
experts on the staff of McCulloch, the chain saw 
manufacturers.
CHOOSING A CHAIN SAW
Choosing the right chain saw out of the many models
available is not difficult, once you have decided on 
the features you are looking for. After that, it is
simply a matter of elimination. Most chain saws use
an 
integral two-cycle gasoline engine for power,
dependability, and efficiency. Chain saws driven by 
electric motors are also available, but these are
limited in power and mobility.
There are two types of chain drives available in
chain saws - direct drive and gear drive. Gear drives
are 
used mostly by professionals who use heavy chains and
want maximum lugging power. Direct drive 
chain saws are lighter, have fewer moving parts, and
are easier to use. Little effort is required to use 
these saws, as the fast-moving chain pulls the saw
through the log. Direct drive saws are the right ones
for outdoorsmen. For the outdoorsman or the casual
user, the smaller and lighter weight chain saws are 
probably the best choice. Saws in the six-pound class
(weighing about eight-and-a-half pounds complete 
with bar and chain) are usually rugged, dependable,
and easy to use. Other small saws range from ten to 
fourteen pounds, plus bar and chain.
Engine displacement is the guide to a saw's power.
Saws are available with from 1.5 to more than nine 
cubic inches displacement. A saw in the two to three-
cubic-inch range is a good choice for the 
outdoorsman. Other factors that affect a saw's
available power are the type of cutting chain,
sprocket, 


--- Page 85 ---
--- Page 47 ---
and guide bar used. A good rule of thumb when
choosing a chain saw is to pick the one with the
shortest 
guide bar to meet your average cutting needs. For
instance, a twelve-inch bar will cut a twenty-four-
inch 
log in half, with two passes. The chain that comes
with your saw is matched to the saw's power output. 
If you need to replace the chain, always replace it
with an identical chain.
Aside from the basic features described above, there
are many "convenience" features on today's chain 
saws. Some outdoorsmen consider easy starting to be
an important consideration because cutting can 
require frequent stopping of the chain saw while
moving from one spot to another. Today's chain saws 
are available with push-button electric starters or a
compression-release for easy manual starting.
As the chain moves around the guide bar in its
special groove, friction develops, building up heat.
A 
lubricating oil must be pumped into the groove during
heating to combat this friction. Automatic oiling 
during cutting is considered by some to be an
important feature, as it requires less conscious
effort than 
saws with manual oiler buttons.
One important aspect of any chain saw should be
"feel" or operator comfort. Newer chain saws tend to 
have all the controls (on-off switch, throttle,
oiler, choke buttons, and so on) conveniently located
near 
the handle, and handle vibration has been almost
completely eliminated. Operator comfort also includes
noise reduction. Most of today's chain saws have
mufflers that reduce noise impulses up to seventy-
five 


--- Page 86 ---
percent.
Modern chain saws have many other extra features.
Whether or not your chain saw is equipped with 
these, will depend on personal preference and
budgetary considerations. Remember, though, that as
in 
the case of knives and axes, quality pays in the long
run.
CUTTING TECHNIQUES
Any exposed portion of the chain around the guide bar
of a chain saw can be used for cutting. Most 
cutting is done with the bottom edge of the guide
bar, allowing the fast moving chain to "eat" its way 
through the wood. Cuts made with the top edge of the
bar require putting the saw through the wood.
To fell a tree, make your first cut (1) to about one-
quarter to one-third of the tree's diameter. Then
make 
the diagonal cut (2) to meet the first cut. Begin
your backcut (3) on the opposite side, about two
inches 
higher than the level cut.
Here is a brief rundown of chain saw cutting methods.
Felling The method of felling a tree is influenced by
physical factors such as the size of the tree, the 
slope of the ground, adjacent trees, and so on.
Experience in felling can be gained by observing 
professionals and by practising on smaller "safe"
trees. Large trees, or those where the direction of
fall is 
critical, should be left to experienced fellers.
When felling a tree, and indeed in any chain saw
operation, one should always bear in mind the safety 
--- Page 48 ---
aspect and take no risks; know beforehand your path
of retreat as the tree begins to fall; check for dead
branches or loose sheets of bark that might fall from


--- Page 87 ---
the tree; and clear any obstacles from the ground 
under the falling tree.
Undercutting Make the first cut horizontally on the
side of the tree in the direction of the fall.
Consider 
how much stump you want to leave. Cut through a
quarter to a third of the tree's diameter,
perpendicular 
to the line of fall. Then make a diagonal cut
downward to meet the first cut. Remove the chunk of
wood 
from the notch.
Backcutting Start the backcut on the opposite side of
the tree, two inches higher than the level of the 
horizontal undercut. Do not cut through into the
notch. Leave a small uncut section between the 
undercut and the backcut to act as a hinge. The tree
should fall at ninety degrees to the face of the
hinge. 
Leaving the hinge thicker at one end can usually make
the tree fall toward the thickest side of the hinge. 
Always remove the saw from the cut before the tree
falls, or the saw may get damaged.
Wedging Wedges are used to control the direction of
the fall of a tree and to prevent saw binding in both
felling and bucking. Wedges are made of plastic,
aluminum, magnesium, hardwood, and steel. Never 
use a steel wedge in the same cut with a chain saw.
The chain can get damaged if it accidentally cuts 
into the wedge.
If a tree is large or has no apparent lean, wedges
are employed to induce a lean. After the undercut
notch 
has been made and the backcut is about onequarter
finished, stop the saw, leaving the saw in the cut. 
Then drive the wedge into the cut behind the bar.
(Two wedges may be needed on large trees.) The 
wedge must be driven in squarely, in line with the
direction of the fall, and not at an angle. Restart


--- Page 88 ---
the 
saw and continue cutting. This procedure should
establish a lean in the tree. If it has not, stop the
saw 
again and drive the wedge in farther. Be alert! As
soon as the tree starts to tip, turn the saw off,
pull it 
out of the cut, and quickly move away from the tree
on your preplanned path of retreat.
Limbing After a tree has been felled, its limbs and
branches must be cut off. Start at the butt end and 
work towards the top of the tree. Branches on the
down side of the tree must be cut carefully, as most
are 
under pressure from the weight of the tree. When cut,
they can release like a spring and snap in any 
direction.
When a branch is supported at both ends (by the tree
at one end and the ground at the other), topcut the 
branch first to prevent binding. Then finish with an
undercut. When a branch is supported at one end 
only, undercut first and then topcut. These
procedures prevent peeling of the bark by the branch
as it 
falls away. Be sure that the log itself cannot roll
or shift as supporting branches are cut.
Bucking The word "bucking" means to cut logs or large
branches into convenient lengths. Care should 
be taken not to cut into the ground on the "blind"
side of the log. For logs supported at only one end, 
undercut one-third of the diameter and then finish
from the top. For logs supported on both ends, first 
cut from the top to about one-third of the diameter
and then undercut to finish. Be careful when doing 
this, as the two halves can drop very suddenly. When
bucking on a hill, stand on the uphill side.
--- Page 49 ---
With a little practice, you should be able to handle


--- Page 89 ---
a chain saw with no problem whatsoever. One very 
important thing to remember, though, when using a
chain saw is that there is no way to stop a falling 
tree. Don't start a job you are not certain you can
handle.
CHAIN SAW SAFETY
Accidents with chain saws can happen in the same way
as accidents with other power tools in your 
home. They are generally the result of horseplay or
other foolish behavior. And they can be prevented 
simply by treating the chain saw with respect, by
wearing proper clothing, and by developing sensible 
operating habits.
When you are using your chain saw, think safe; plan
ahead; keep children away; dress properly (watch 
any scarves or loose, hanging garments); handle fuel
safely; keep your chain sharp; practise preventive 
maintenance; and stop the saw when you are not
cutting. If you observe these basic safety rules,
chances 
of having an accident are minimal.
CHAPTER 11
CAMPFIRE MYSTIQUE
Cooking on a campfire is a vanishing art. Indeed,
building a truly fine campfire is a skill rarely 
possessed by outdoor recreationists who probably
consider themselves "outdoorsmen". The reasons for 
this are understandable and lamentable. Undoubtedly a
gasoline or propane stove is at times more 
convenient. Even the young Cree-Indian fishing guides
in northern Canada more often than not cook for 
their clients a shore lunch of fish fillets on a
gasoline stove. The old-timers sneer at this,
preferring 
instead the traditional campfire.
Were it not for gasoline and propane stoves, camping
would have to be seriously curtailed in many areas 
of this continent because there are just not enough
dead or living trees to go around. To compound this 
problem, in some areas campfires are not allowed. A


--- Page 90 ---
campfire has a mystical aura that no propane stove 
or tent heater will ever match. It symbolizes the
very heart of the out-of-doors. Surprisingly, there
is a 
revival of interest in campfires. Perhaps the
increasing number of canoe trippers, wilderness 
backpackers, hunters, and anglers who want to get
away deep into the bush may account for this surge of
interest. A few years ago many of the camping
articles in our outdoor magazines dealt with how to
buy 
camp stoves. Today, they describe campfire woods and
how to build campfires. There has always been a 
hard core of hunters and fishermen to whom a campfire
has never lost its charisma, but by and large the 
rise of interest in campfires and fireplaces is a new
phenomenon. I hope that it continues. Everyone who 
considers himself an outdoorsman should know how to
make a good campfire.
CAMPFIRE WOODS
One way to get a proper campfire is to use the right
wood. If you want a pot of tea in a hurry, you will 
have to use a quick-starting wood such as poplar. But
to broil a venison steak, you will need hot coals 
--- Page 50 ---
such as those produced by seasoned hickory.
Wood (and trees) can be divided into two groups -
hard and soft. In the case of trees, this division is
somewhat of a misnomer. Conifers are called
softwoods, while deciduous trees are called hardwoods
by 
forest workers from pulp cutters to forestry
engineers. Although all evergreen trees have soft
wood, so 
do many species of hardwood or broad-leafed trees
such as poplar, alder, and basswood. The hardwoods 


--- Page 91 ---
with truly hard wood are oak, hickory, maple, birch,
and sweet gum.
THE HARDWOOD OR DECIDUOUS TREES
Alder The alder is a fast-growing tree of swamplands
and stream bottoms. It is found from Alaska to the 
Gulf coast, from Newfoundland to the mid-west, and
from the Rockies to the Pacific. It bums fast, with 
a quick flame and strong heat, but it also bums out
quickly.
Alder tends to spit and snap, so watch for sparks. It
is excellent for quick boiling and cooking and is 
good for baking. Because it burns fast, have plenty
of it cut. It makes excellent kindling when well 
seasoned.
Ash There are about fifteen species of ash in eastern
North America. Their range extends from central 
Ontario and British Columbia south to Florida. Ash,
particularly the red, white, and black varieties that
are most often used as campfire wood, live on moist
sites.
All ash are heavy hardwoods. They don't make good
kindling because they tend to start burning slowly. 
White ash can be used for firewood green, while red
and black ash should be seasoned first. They all 
throw good strong heat, and produce coals which are
ideal for broiling and frying.
Basswood The linden, as the basswood is sometimes
called, is found from Maine to the Dakotas and 
from southern Ontario to Kentucky. It is very light
and soft. When used for fuel, it should be well 
seasoned. It bums quickly and turns to ash rapidly.
It spits and snaps and throws sparks readily, so be 
careful and be certain the area around your campfire
is cleared of humus and dead leaves. Basswood, 
like all soft woods, is good for boiling and quick
cooking.
Birch The birches - black, yellow, and white - make
good firewood. Black and yellow birch are superior 
to white. However, trappers in northern Canada depend


--- Page 92 ---
on the hardy white birch to heat their cabins 
through the long winter. Birches are hard and heavy.
Yellow birch is found from New England to 
Minnesota and from Central Ontario south to
Pennsylvania. Black birch ranges from southern Maine
and 
southern Ontario to northern Alabama along the
Appalachian Mountains. White birch, sometimes called 
paper or silver birch, is found from Alaska south
through Canada and the Great Lakes states to the 
Atlantic seaboard.
The bark from all these birches is easily stripped
off and makes excellent kindling. Birches burn well 
even when wet. They start readily, and bum slowly and
with an intense flame. The coals retain heat for a 
long time and are good for frying a steak or
simmering a stew.
--- Page 51 ---
Beech The beech is a very hard wood. Its range
extends from central Ontario to the Gulf of Mexico
and 
from Maine to Kansas. It will burn when green and
give off plenty of heat. Many outdoorsmen rate 
beech as highly as oak. The coals retain heat for a
long time, making them a good bet for frying and 
broiling.
Hickory All the hickories are excellent campfire
woods, with the shagbark being the best. There is no 
doubt that hickory is the finest of all campfire
woods. The hickories are found in a variety of forest
habitats, and their general range extends from Maine
and southern Ontario south to Louisiana and Texas.
Hickory sawdust and chips are the best wood to use
when smoking fish, ham, or bacon. A hickory-
smoked ham is far superior to the synthetic chemical-
smoking process used on supermarket hams. 
Similarly, a good steak - beef or venison broiled on


--- Page 93 ---
a thick bed of hickory coals - is much tastier than 
charcoal-broiled steak. It burns with a steady and
hot flame, and its coals remain hot for a long time.
Hornbeam There are two species of hornbeams - the
American and the hop - and both are very hard and 
heavy woods. Indeed, the hop hornbeam is sometimes
called ironwood. The range of hornbeams extends 
from southern Ontario through the eastern half of the
United States to northern Florida. They do not 
burn too well when green, but after being well
seasoned, they bum with a steady heat and produce hot
coals.
Maple There are over twenty maple species in North
America, but only the hard or sugar maple makes 
first-rate firewood. It is hard and burns evenly,
even when green. It leaves very hot and longlasting
coals 
for long cooking or broiling.
The soft maples, such as the red maple, burn much
like poplar quickly and easily. They are a better bet
for quick cooking, but they should not be used
unseasoned because they don't bum well when green.
How does one tell the soft maple from the hard maple?
It is easy by the leaf margins. The lobes on a soft 
maple's leaf have serrated or saw-like margins, and
the underside of the leaf is silvery green. The 
margins of the leaf lobes of a hard maple are smooth,
and the underside of the leaf is dull green.
Oak There are about sixty species of oaks in North
America. Most of them make good firewood, but 
some have to be seasoned first. Probably the best is
white oak, which will start well and burn when 
green.
The red and water oak should be seasoned first. The
oaks are all hard and dense woods that bum slowly 
and produce hot coals. The only exceptions to this
are the willow oak and the scarlet oak, both of which


--- Page 94 ---
bum fast. They can be used for quick boiling, while
the other oaks are a good bet for long cooking and 
broiling.
Poplar The poplar family contains the aspens and the
cottonwoods. They are rapid growing trees. Some 
of the species are the first trees to recolonize old
burns. Some species grow on high, dry, and sandy
soils. 
--- Page 52 ---
Poplars range from Newfoundland to Alaska through the
Rocky Mountain states, the Great Lakes, into 
New England, and south to Kentucky.
Poplar wood is light and soft. It bums quickly when
dry. It is also a good wood for fast boiling and 
cooking, and it is ideal for getting a brown sheen on
biscuits in a reflector oven. When dry, it makes 
good kindling.
Sweet Gum This bottom land tree is a beautiful sight
in the autumn. It is found from Connecticut to 
Florida and west to Texas. It has a fairly soft wood
and burns quickly, thus it is best used for quick 
cooking.
THE SOFTWOODS OR CONIFERS
Balsam Fir The balsam fir lives on moist bottom
lands. Its range extends from Newfoundland to 
northern Alberta and south through the northern Great
Lakes states to the Atlantic seaboard. It is very 
soft and resinous, with a high moisture content when
green. It is difficult to start a flame when green, 
hence it should be used only when seasoned. It burns
quickly when dry and throws a fast heat. It spits 
and snaps while burning, so be careful. The balsam
fir is basically a quick-cooking wood. Small, dry, 
pencil-thick branches make good kindling, even when
broken from a live tree.
Cedar The outdoorsman should concern himself with
only red, white, and western red cedar for 
campfires. However, cedars are only third-rate as


--- Page 95 ---
campfire woods. White cedar and western red cedar 
live on moist sites, while red cedar prefers open
areas. Cedars, as a group, are widely distributed
over 
North America. All cedars are light and soft woods
that do not bum well when green. When seasoned, 
they ignite and burn quickly, but still give off a
lot of smoke.
When cedar burns, sparks pop and fly, so the campfire
must be in an area well cleared of debris and 
humus. Cedar bark, when dried and shredded, makes
tremendous tinder for starting fires.
Douglas Fir This large western evergreen is not
really a fir, but is related to the spruces. It
ranges from 
southern British Columbia to central California and
as far east as Montana. It is a soft and light wood 
that bums quickly. It tends to be smoky. It is
suitable only for quick boiling.
Pine The pines are widely distributed on the sandy
soils of this continent. They are light and soft
woods. 
White, red, jack, and lodgepole pines burn well even
when green. Pitchpine has to be seasoned to burn 
well. Pines all throw a surprising amount of light
and are generally easy to ignite.
The pines are for quick cooking. They tend to pop and
throw sparks, so be careful. They also blacken 
cooking pots. If you are using pine as a campfire
wood, coat the outside of your pots with soap for an 
easy cleanup before putting them on the fire.
Spruce The spruces are widely distributed evergreen
trees. White and black spruces range from coast to 
coast and from Alaska to the Great Lakes. Western
white, Douglas, Englemann, and Sitka spruces are 
--- Page 53 ---
western species, while red spruce is found from Nova
Scotia through New England to central Ontario. 


--- Page 96 ---
The spruces are light and soft. To be good campfire
fuels, they should be seasoned. They start easily 
when dry and make excellent kindling, but they never
burn as fast as some of the other softwoods, hence 
they are a good bet for all-around campfire cooking,
as long as hot, long-lasting coals are not needed. 
Small dead branches of standing spruce trees make
good fire starters, even in wet weather, but they do 
throw sparks.
Tamarack The larch, as the tamarack is sometimes
called, is the only conifer that sheds its needles
every 
fall. There are several species of larch. The larch
belongs to the pine family, but is a much better 
firewood than the pines. Tamaracks range from
Newfoundland north to the Yukon and south into the 
Rocky Mountain states, the Great Lakes states, and
into New England. It lives on moist, boggy soils. Its
wood is the densest and heaviest of all the conifers,
and is best when seasoned. Many northwoods 
outdoorsmen prefer the tamarack for firewood over all
the other species except perhaps white birch. The 
larch bums with a strong and even heat, and is fairly
long lasting, but it doesn't leave as good coals as 
the birch. When burned green, it spits and sputters.
FIREPLACES
The second secret to a good campfire, particularly a
good cooking fire, lies in the fireplace. The type of
fireplace you should build depends on the terrain,
weather, prevailing winds, and, of course, the length
of time you will be using the campsite. The best
fireplace is   one with a high back for draft and
wide 
arms for pots and pans, and a metal grill or grate.
Such a fireplace can be constructed only if there are
plenty of the right kind of rocks around.


--- Page 97 ---
The next best fireplace is the keyhole or flask-
shaped ring made of rocks. The fire is maintained in
the 
main portion of the fireplace. Hot      coals are
raked periodically under the grate into the narrow,
lower 
portion for cooking. Still another fireplace is a
double row of rocks with a foot of space between them
for the fire. A grate is placed over these rows to
support cooking utensils. 
If no stones or rocks are available, a trench
fireplace is a good bet. You must dig deep enough to
get into 
mineral soil. The depth also depends on the size of
the fire. The trench fireplace should be dug like a 
narrow, army foxhole. It must be narrow enough for a
grate       or iron rods, and the open end should be 
upwind. A more sophisticated version of a trench
fireplace has a small hole upwind which is connected 
with the firepit. As warm air rises from the fire,
cooler air comes into the firepit through this hole, 
assuring better combustion. A fireplace can also be
made of two logs - preferably green hardwood. The 
logs are simply laid parallel to each other about a
foot or so apart, or they are laid in the form of a 
narrow "V". The V-shaped fireplace is better on windy
days in open country.
For a quick pot of coffee or tea water, an open fire
is generally adequate if there is no wind or if the
fire 
is sheltered from the wind. Three rocks can be used
to support the coffee pot. So can three metal tent 
pegs. The pot can also be suspended over the fire
with two sapling forks and a crossbar. Only the tyro 
will use a perfect fork. The experienced outdoorsman
knows that such a fork is hard to drive into the 
ground. Select a sturdy sapling with a strong
offshoot branch. Such a crotch is easier to sink by 


--- Page 98 ---
--- Page 54 ---
hammering on the main stem. The forks and crosspiece
should always be cut of green wood, if possible.
For cooking over a campfire, you do not need any
special cooking utensils. A frying pan is a must, as
are 
a couple of pots. You may       wish to add a coffee
pot as well. If weight is no problem, a cast-iron  
skillet is good to have. It must be well broken in
before you actually use it for cooking.
For those who want to specialize in open fire
cooking, a Dutch  oven is a good investment. This is 
simply a large metal pot - cast iron or aluminum -
with a close-fitting lid and three short legs. I
prefer 
cast iron, but aluminum is much lighter and does not
need to be broken in before it is actually used. A 
Dutch oven is ideal for cooking stews, beans, pot
roasts, or even for baking bread over an open fire.
You 
actually put the oven on the hot coals or even bury
it among them. For more heat, hot coals are put over 
the lid. It is easy to cook a stew in a Dutch oven -
just bury the pot in hot coals in the morning and the
stew will be cooked and waiting for you when you
trudge back into camp in the evening.
A reflector oven is still another cooking utensil you
may wish to buy. Basically this is a small aluminum 
lean-to. It is placed by the fire with the open front
facing the fire. It is a good idea to build a
reflector 
wall of logs, rocks, or a sheet of aluminum foil on
the oppo site side of the fire to capture even more 
heat. A good cook can   bake just about anything from
a blueberry pie to biscuits in a reflector oven. 
Most reflector ovens are made of light sheet-metal
and fold bake just about anything from a blueberry 
pie to biscuits in a reflector oven can be made from


--- Page 99 ---
aluminum foil stretched over a frame of green sticks.
The way to build it is exactly like a canvas or a
green bough lean-to that you would build as an 
emergency 
One thing that frequently perplexes the modern cook
accustomed to cooking on a stove where 
temperatures can be regulated, is how to regulate
heat. Basically, cooking over a campfire requires 
constant vigilance. You must check the food
constantly so as not to overcook it or burn it.
However 
there  is a rough way of determinin the temperature
of a fire which may be of some help. Hold your open 
palm in the same spot where your pot will be and
count - count "one and one, one and two, one and 
three," and so on to achieve one-second intervals. If
you can only hold your    hand there for "one and 
one" or not even that, you have a fire of over 500'
F. If you can hold your hand for two or three
seconds, 
you have a fire of about 450' F, plus or minus ten
percent. If you      can hold your hand there for
four or 
five seconds, you have about 375' F plus or minus ten
percent; six to eight seconds, 300' F plus        or 
minus ten percent.
Cooking over an open fire is a skill that separates
the tyros from the experts. It is something that
every 
outdoorsman should learn. One does not have to be a
gourmet cook, simply skillful enough to put 
together a hot and nourishing meal. But it has never
ceased to amaze me what culinary delights some 
campfire cooks can come up      with. The old log-
drive cooks were like magicians; they could cook an 
entire meal in two or three Dutch ovens.
Even people who do most of their outdoor cooking over
a propane stove may find a basic knowledge of 
campfire cooking useful. Propane and gasoline stoves


--- Page 100 ---
have been known to break down.
--- Page 55 ---
CHAPTER 12
THE ABC'S OF CANOEING
Every summer thousands of people, particularly young
people, discover the simple but rewarding joys of 
the canoe. Canoeing has never been more popular. The
rivers of Canada's north, which have not been 
canoed since the days of the fur-trading brigades a
hundred years ago, are today being paddled regularly.
The urge to get away from it all, the canoe seen as a
romantic symbol of rivers flowing free, of wild and 
unspoiled places, are reasons for the sport's growing
popularity.
The canoe is a highly versatile craft. It can be
paddled, poled, and some can even be rowed. It can be
sailed or propelled by an outboard motor mounted on a
side-bracket or a square-stern. It call be quite a 
tricky craft requiring an expert hand, or, by
clamping on outrigger pontoons, it can be transformed
into a 
boat that is safe enough for young children to
handle.
CHOOSING A CANOE
Basically, choosing a canoe boils down to three
things: the design of the canoe (this means the type
of 
canoe as well as its various features), the length or
size of the canoe, and the material from which the 
canoe is constructed. The purpose of the canoe
largely determines its type and size. On the other
hand, 
the choice of construction material depends largely
on the qualities desired and, of course, personal 
preferences.
The standard canoe of today is a double-ender, with


--- Page 101 ---
the ends lower and the floor flatter than the canoe
of 
yesteryear. The flatter floor makes it more stable
with a good load capacity, yet one that paddles and 
handles well. The lower ends allow it to catch less
wind. Another basic canoe is the squarestem. This 
type of canoe is preferable to the double-ender if an
outboard motor is to be used a great deal. There are 
two types of square-sterns. In the more common one,
the entire stern is vertical or square. The other 
type, frequently referred to as the Y-stern, flares
up to form a vertical stem only above the water line.
The paddling qualities of the square-stern are
inferior to those of the double-ender, particularly
in fast 
water. But       in the case of the Y-stern, the
sharpness of the stem is preserved under water, hence
it 
paddles as well as the true double-ender. Its   only
handicap is that the transom can accommodate only a 
small motor - a three horse power probably being the
safe limit, while  the more common type of square-
stem can accommodate a much larger motor, even a
twenty horse power on a big freighter canoe.
There are two other basic types of canoes. The racing
canoe, designed for competitive sport, is a long 
lean craft. It is available in various lengths, some
as long as twenty-four feet with a very    narrow
beam 
of twenty-six inches or less. There are also canoes
with kayak-like characteristics, again narrow-beamed.
These are usually decked, have cockpits, and come in
various sizes. Their principal use is in river 
touring. They have a limited load capacity and hence
are not really the best choice for extended camping 
trips into the wilderness. However, with ultra-light
camping gear, they can be used.
There are other specialized canoes such as the wide-


--- Page 102 ---
beamed Sportspal, which is designed principally 
with stability in mind. Such a craft is useful for
fishermen and hunters who want a light and very      
--- Page 56 ---
stable canoe with a shallow draft. This canoe is a
poor choice for fast water because it is difficult to
paddle. Its shallow draft also  makes it difficult to
control in high winds. In spite of its poor paddling 
quality, the Sportspal can be rowed with c ' reat
success, and indeed the manufacturer equips it with
oar-
locks and oars. Another specialized canoe is the
ultra-light miniature. At one time these were made 
entirely of cedar planking by the pioneer canoe
enthusiast, Henry Rushton. One of the more famous 
Rushton canoes was the  Nessmuk, a mere ten-footer
weighing fifteen pounds, nine-and-a-half ounces, 
and named after the pioneer canoeist and wilderness
writer, George Washington Sears, better known by 
his pen name Nessmuk. Today, the Old Town Canoe
Company has introduced a fiberglass version of the 
Nessmuk. This new craft is ten feet long and weighs
eighteen-and-a-half pounds. This is a great canoe 
for a man who wants to follow Nessmuk's bidding and
travel alone into the wilderness. The expert 
canoeist will find the modem Nessmuk a real fun
canoe, a pure joy to handle.
Most canoes today have keels. The keel has some
important advantages. It tends to stiffen the hull
and 
saves wear on the canoe bottom. For paddling in lakes
and slow rivers, the keel helps to keep a straight 
course. But for river travel where white water is
likely to be encountered, a keel is a handicap. A
keel-
less canoe is much more maneuverable. It responds to
paddle strokes much more quickly. making it 


--- Page 103 ---
easier to avoid rocks and other obstructions. Hence
the choice of a canoe with or without a keel depends 
largely on where the craft will be used.
Canoes have been made of various types of materials
from Indian birch bark to thin cedar planking, 
pressed paper, rubber, canvas-covered wood, and, of
course, in the last twenty years, of aluminum and 
fiberglass. Today canoes are made only of canvas-
covered wood., aluminum, and fiberglass and even 
the canvas has been replaced by synthetic fabrics.
Indeed, aluminum and fiberglass are probably now 
more popular than wood and fabric. The main reason
for this is that aluminum and fiberglass lend 
themselves better to assembly-line production than
wood and canvas, which makes them cheaper at the 
retail level.
The best construction material for canoes is a
controversial topic among canoe buffs. The reason is
that 
every material has its advantages and disadvantages.
Also, every canoe buff has his own prejudices and 
preferences. Wood and fabric canoes are cooler in
summer and warmer in winter than aluminum or even 
fiberglass. They are much easier to repair than
aluminum, or perhaps even fiberglass. This can be a
very 
important consideration on a wilderness canoe trip.
Wood is also much quieter than aluminum and a 
little quieter than fiberglass. Wood and fabric
require no built-in flotation chambers to keep the
canoe 
afloat in case it overturns. However, wood is
expensive and requires maintenance. A sixteenfoot
canoe 
(wood and fabric) can cost up to a hundred dollars
more than a fiberglass or aluminum canoe of the 
same length. The wood also has to be varnished and,
if it is canvas-covered, the canvas must be painted.
Fiberglass is less noisy than aluminum. Also it stays
cooler than aluminum in the hot summer sun. Like 


--- Page 104 ---
the wood canoe, fiberglass tends to be more elastic
than aluminum and usually will take a harder blow 
without puncturing. Some canoe buffs claim that
fiberglass is smoother - that it slides off
underwater 
rocks more easily than aluminum or fabric. Fiberglass
is, of course, largely maintenance free and 
reasonably easy to patch in the case of punctures.
The real disadvantage of fiberglass is that it is
fairly 
heavy, but it is impossible to make a fiberglass
canoe that is as light as aluminum and at the same
time 
--- Page 57 ---
as sturdy.
Aluminum canoes are also maintenance free, certainly
in fresh water. They are fairly rugged, although 
they may dent. It is perhaps for this reason that
many canoe liveries use aluminum canoes. Aluminum 
canoes can be made fairly light with good carrying
capacities, hence many canoe trippers prefer 
aluminum. But aluminum canoes are generally both
noisy and hot.
Next to construction material, canoe size is the most
problematical aspect for the novice. For two-man 
canoe trips of several days to several weeks, nothing
under sixteen feet is recommended and a seventeen-
footer is even better. Although either size will
accommodate two people plus their gear, the shorter 
canoe may ride too low in the water for easy
paddling. If such a canoe is selected carefully, it
is still 
light enough to be portaged by one man and can be
cartopped fairly easily.
The small canoes - up to twelve feet - are usually
one-man canoes. Because they are easy to car-top,
they 
are popular with fishermen and hunters. Generally


--- Page 105 ---
speaking, the small canoes are less stable and 
therefore less safe in the hands of anyone less than
an expert. The only exception to this is the wide-
beamed Sportspal which, because of its wide beam,
will accommodate two men and has great stability.
Canoes of an intermediate length - fourteen or
fifteen feet are usually chosen by the novice who
believes 
that the full-sized canoes are too long for him.
However, the intermediate canoes are too long for one
man and for a long canoe trip, too short for two men
plus all their gear, as the canoe will probably ride 
too low in the water for easy paddling. A good rule
to follow when trying to decide on what length of 
canoe is: when in doubt, buy the next longest size.
Canoes much longer than eighteen feet are more
difficult to cartop and are harder to portage,
particularly 
where the portages are steep and winding. But of
course such canoes have amazing stability, and even 
when fully loaded, don't draw much water. The giant
Rupert House canoes are rarely used for recreation. 
The only place they are seen regularly is in Canada's
far north. These twenty-four-foot squaresterns are 
still the main means of transportation for the
Indians around the Hudson Bay coast.
CHOOSING A PADDLE
Choosing a paddle is not at all difficult. Length is
one important consideration. The voyageurs of old 
recommended that the bowman's paddle should reach
from the ground to his chin, while the stern man's 
should go from the ground to his eyes. The modern
canoe tripper is unlikely to choose paddles of 
different lengths. A compromise length from the
ground to the nose is a good bet. The blade should
not 
be wider than four and a half to five inches.
Paddles can be made of several different woods. For
rapids and shallow water, hardwoods such as ash, 


--- Page 106 ---
hard maple, and yellow birch are best. These woods
can take a fair amount of punishment on rocks, 
sand, and gravel. Of these, maple is the poorest
choice because it has a tendency to warp. Don't leave
wet paddles in strong, direct sunlight to dry. This
promotes warping and even splitting. For deep, open 
water, spruce paddles are excellent. They are light
and very strong for their weight. Spruce is also the 
--- Page 58 ---
best choice for women or young boys.
LOADING, LAUNCHING, AND LANDING
Loading a canoe is a chore that should be planned a
little ahead of time. It is a good idea to carry 
everything to the water's edge and then
systematically load the canoe. If waves are likely to
be 
encountered, the load should be moved a little aft.
If the bow is a bit overweight, it will ride up
slowly 
with the waves and a wave may come in and hit it
before it goes up.
Aluminum and fiberglass canoes are easier to load
because one can load them from a beach by partially 
dragging them on shore. The main thing is to balance
the load by distributing it as evenly as possible. 
This takes very little ability, only a dash of common
sense. A canvas canoe must be loaded while it is 
entirely afloat. either parallel or at right angles
to shore. If there is any chance of encountering
rough 
water, it is a good idea to lash the bundles to the
thwarts. Or, a line can be run on the inside of the
canoe 
around each thwart and the gear can be attached to
this line with snap swivels. Should the canoe swamp 
or overturn, valuable gear will not be lost.
Another good idea with rough weather in mind is to


--- Page 107 ---
put some light poles on the bottom of the canoe and 
pile the load onto the poles. This will ensure that
the gear does not get wet from the bottom due to any 
water that splashes in. A tarpaulin can be used to
cover or wrap the entire load or the important
portion 
of it to keep it dry from the top. When packing,
remember that the spare paddle must always be on top 
and within easy reach, in case it is needed in an
emergency. When you see a loaded canoe with the spare
paddle buried on the bottom, you know that a couple
of greenhorns are off on their first trip. If one of 
them snaps his paddle on a boulder in white water, he
will need that spare paddle fast. But that is one 
way to learn.
Launching a canoe must be done with specific water
conditions in mind. Generally it is best to launch it
stern first, but on a stormy lake or in rapids this
may be dangerous. Launching a canoe stern first has
the 
advantage of the sternman's being in place to steer
the canoe immediately; he often does all the
steering. 
The canoe should be launched approximately at a right
angle to shore. The sternman should get in even 
if the canoe is only half afloat. His weight will
bring the bow up. Then he can back the canoe out so
that 
the bow is in water deep enough to float even when
the bowman gets in. The bowman now takes hold of 
the bow, puts one foot into the canoe, and shoves off
with the other. With a bit of experience, this 
maneuver can be done without getting the feet wet or
scraping the canoe. A canvas canoe should never 
be scraped. Actually, it is unwise to scrape even an
aluminum or fiberglass canoe.
One of the key things to remember is to select a good
launching spot before you load your canoe. It is 


--- Page 108 ---
very embarrassing to have your bowman leap in, only
to have the canoe hang up on a rock because of 
the weight. When you see canoeists pushing with their
paddles to get off, you know that you are looking 
at tyros.
Landing a canoe is like launching a canoe in reverse.
An unfamiliar landing site should always be 
approached with caution. There are times when a
bowman may have to jump out if shallows come up 
--- Page 59 ---
suddenly. It is the bowman's responsibility to watch
for boulders and shallows. An aluminum canoe can 
be run up onto a beach of very fine sand by fast
paddling and the sternman bending aft to raise the
bow. 
This will not hurt the canoe, but it should never be
attempted with a canvas canoe.
PADDLING A CANOE
There are many strokes that can be used to paddle a
canoe. The choice of which stroke to use depends 
largely on what the canoeist wants to achieve. It
also depends on the number of paddlers and their 
position, but for all practical purposes a canoeist
needs to know only about four or five strokes to
paddle 
a canoe satisfactorily.
The bowman always sets the paddling pace, but the
sternman has the choice of sides because he has to 
steer as well as paddle, and it is only natural that
he steer on the side which is more comfortable for
him. 
In most cases the sternman should be the more
experienced canoeist. In rapids, the bowman must
choose 
where to go because he is in front and in a better
position to see.
Normally the sternman and bowman sit, but in white
water or rough water they should kneel in order to 


--- Page 109 ---
lower the center of gravity. On launching a canoe or
landing, the sternman should also kneel. French 
Canadian voyageurs and Indians always knelt in their
canoes, but their leg muscles were used to this 
form of exercise. Most of us find kneeling to be an
uncomfortable position for long periods. Both the 
sternman and bowman should have at a moment's notice
something soft to kneel on.
It is, of course, the position of the stern seat -
set closer to the stern than the bow seat is to the
bow - that 
gives the stern man the steering advantage. The aft
position allows the stem paddler to pivot the canoe
at 
its midpoint more easily. To change positions, it is
best to land the canoe first. It can be done on water
but it takes a little practice. On signal, the
sternman kneels and leans forward. The bowman then
backs 
up, crouching and holding onto the gunnels until he
reaches the kneeling sternman. The sternman slides 
between the legs of the bowman and moves forward. The
bowman then takes his new position in the 
stern and the sternman moves up to the bow. This
maneuver is harder to execute with baggage, but it is
safer then because a loaded canoe is more stable.
The Bow Stroke This is the most elementary stroke. It
is simple and natural. The trick is not to make it 
too long. Let us assume that the paddle swings
through a hundred-and-eighty-degree arc from the time
it 
is dipped into the water until it is withdrawn. For
the first ninety degrees, the paddle is deepest in
the 
water. As it rides up during the other ninety
degrees, it lifts water instead of pulling at it. It
is no longer 
contributing much to propelling the canoe forward,


--- Page 110 ---
but your muscles are working as hard, so take the 
blade out of the water as it passes your hip. The
stroke may not look graceful - it is short and choppy
- 
but it will be much more efficient and less tiring
than a longer stroke. It will also allow you to
paddle 
faster. The riverine tribes of Africa use this stroke
to great effect in their dugout canoes.
The paddle should act as a lever, with the lower hand
being the fulcrum. The trick is to use not only your 
arms, but to use some of your body weight from the
shoulder and arm as well, by leaning in a little.
This 
is done by keeping the upper arm stiff for a fraction
of a second as you make the stroke. The bow stroke 
--- Page 60 ---
is used solely to propel the canoe, but it is not
used only in the bow position.
The Quarter-Sweep Stroke This stroke is used by the
bowman to help turn the canoe faster than the 
sternman could turn it alone. Of course, it should be
done only at the sternman's request. The bowman 
leans forward stretching his arms, and sweeps the
paddle in an arc , back until it is at right angles
to the 
craft. The quartersweep is much more effective from a
kneeling position because the sweep begins 
further forward. If a really tight turn is needed,
the sternman will do a reverse sweep on the opposite
side.
Bow Draw This stroke is used to make the canoe turn
or change direction sharply. The paddler simply 
dips the blade fully in the water and pulls it
towards the canoe. This draws the canoe towards the
paddle. 
The paddle is lifted straight up for the next stroke.
With this simple stroke, a canoe can be moved 


--- Page 111 ---
sideways very quickly and easily.
Sculling Draw This stroke is simply a figure eight
under water. The lower arm and hand must do most of 
the pushing and pulling, while the upper hand and arm
act as a pivot. This is a very useful stroke in fast 
water where it is unwise to lift the paddle out of
the water.
Rudder Stroke This stroke is not actually a stroke
because the paddle is not used to pull the canoe. It
is 
simply a steering stroke where the blade is rotated
from side to side to steer the canoe.
Pitch Stroke This is one of the most useful strokes
for the lone canoeist. -The angle of the stroke - its
pitch - changes gradually as the stroke is carried
out. It is also used by the sternman instead of the
bow 
stroke which would overpower the canoe.
The key element of a pitch stroke is wrist action.
The same sweep is used as with the bow stroke, but
the 
wrist is rolled outward. Also, the upper hand is
rolled out toward the gunnel, In this way, the canoe
will 
move in a straightforward direction. If the bow tends
to wander a little in one direction, the paddler can 
compensate by pushing out the blade and by moving the
upper arm towards himself.
Fishhook Stroke This stroke is easy to teach, but
that is its only virtue. The experienced single
paddler 
soon learns that the pitch stroke is much more
efficient in propelling the canoe forward in a
straight 
course. The fishhook stroke resembles the letter J,
and indeed it is at times called the "J" stroke. It
is 
begun like a bow stroke, but this forces the bow of
the canoe off the straight course. Thus the paddler 


--- Page 112 ---
compensates by pushing over or doing the draw stroke
at the end of the bow stroke to get the canoe on 
its forward direction again.
The fishhook stroke makes the canoe move in a zig-zag
fashion. But since the paddler must in one 
motion carry out two strokes, he uses up twice as
much energy. The pitch stroke accomplishes the same 
thing but more efficiently. It is, of course, harder
to learn.
Indian Stroke This stroke is sometimes called the
hunting stroke because it is meant to be done
silently. 
It is simply a pitch stroke in which the paddle blade
is never lifted out of the water, but simply knifed 
forward on its edge. It is this feature that makes it
quiet. There is no splash of blade being lifted out,
or 
--- Page 61 ---
inserted into the water and there is no water
dripping from the blade.
However, this stroke is quiet only when done slowly.
When it, and particularly the forward knifing of 
the blade, are done quickly, the paddle makes a high-
pitched whirring noise that alarms wildlife at 
surprisingly great distances. Knife the blade through
the water slowly and the stroke will be quiet. The 
Indian stroke is also useful in stormy weather
because the paddle can be kept in the water at all
times.
The essentials of canoeing consist of loading,
launching, unloading, and paddling the canoe. Other
skills 
such as running rapids, coping with wind and waves,
lining a canoe down the rapids, or tracking it up 
rapids are all frosting on the cake. They come with
experience. Reading up on the subject may help, but 
no book can tell a canoeist how to run rapids,
because so much depends on a man's reflexes, his


--- Page 113 ---
ability 
to make split-second decisions, and even his cool
thinking.
There is really only one way to become a good
canoeist, and that is to go out and paddle a canoe.
CHAPTER 13
ARCHERY FOR THE OUTDOORSMAN
Bows are ancient. Archeological evidence indicates
that bows were in use fifty thousand years ago and 
perhaps even earlier. Paintings in Spanish caves
dating back twenty thousand years show hunters armed 
with bows stalking the big game of Europe. When a
modern archer draws his bow, he is participating in 
a sport of ancient lineage. It was only a matter of
time until the bow, a weapon of the chase, also
became 
a weapon of war. The English, with their long bows,
were great archers. The Japanese, Turks, Scythians, 
and Genghis Khan's Mongols were all skilled bowmen.
North American Indians were good archers as 
well.
Gunpowder and improvements in firearms brought about
a decline in the use of bows and arrows both 
for hunting and warfare. Firearms became more
efficient and easier to use. However, at the turn of
this 
century, archery began to enjoy a revival. By the
1950's archery had become a minor but serious sport. 
My comments here will be restricted to hunting with a
bow; target archery is a competitive sport rather 
than an outdoor pastime.
There is no doubt that hunting with a bow places
limitations on the hunter that do not exist when he
is 
armed with a rifle. But there is an added challenge,
an added thrill to using this ancient weapon. For 
many people bow hunting adds a new dimension and
meaning to the hunt.
Today, archers enjoy privileges that gun hunters do
not have. They may hunt in areas where the 


--- Page 114 ---
discharge of firearms is illegal and usually they are
allowed a much longer hunting season because the 
bow is regarded as an inefficient way of bagging
game. Modem archery is not particularly expensive. A 
novice will find that $40 worth of equipment is ample
for learning the sport. A bow hunter after big 
game can be well equipped for $150.
The beginning archer will find that drawing, holding,
and releasing an arrow demand good physical 
--- Page 62 ---
condition. However, strength alone is not enough
without good muscle tone. Almost any exercise that 
stretches and strengthens the upper body muscles will
be beneficial. The advice of Saxton Pope, the 
father of modem archery, is hard to beat. "Begin with
a light bow and work up to the heavier weights as 
rapidly as possible. Do not shoot too much at first.
Muscles will strengthen very rapidly if given a 
chance, but if they get tender and sore, you will
have to quit until they recover."
THE BOW
Wood is the traditional material for bows. However,
bone, bamboo, sinew, and leather have all been 
used, together or separately. Yew, osage, and
lemonwood are regarded as the best woods for bows. 
Today fiberglass has become an important material in
bow making. Bows made entirely of fiberglass are 
virtually indestructible.
Bows have been made of a variety of materials
including bone, bamboo, sinew, leather, wood, and 
fiberglass. Today, wood-fiberglass laminates are the
most popular.
However, bows made of wood-fiberglass laminate are
preferred by most archers.
Bows come in three styles - recurved, straight, and
semi-recurved. The extra bends on the tip of a 
recurved bow give it added power and make the bow
easier to draw. Recurved bows of wood-fiberglass 


--- Page 115 ---
laminate are the best all-around bet. This type of
bow provides the best combination of cast, speed, and
stability.
The basic parts of the bow include the upper and
lower limbs, the handle section, and the bow string. 
The handle section has the grip, the sight window,
and the arrow rest.
Bow strings are now made of strands of dacron. Each
bow string has a "serving" directly across the 
handle. The serving area has a tightly wound thread
around it to protect the bow string from fraying. On 
the serving is a nocking point, the place where the
archer nocks the arrow on the bow string. The 
nocking point is always located slightly above a
perpendicular line from the arrow rest to the bow
string.
By far the most important consideration in the
beginner's bow is the matter of weight. Bow makers 
classify their weapons according to the number of
pounds of energy required to draw a twentyeight-inch 
arrow. The twentyeight-inch standard is used because
the average adult male, properly fitted, uses 
arrows measuring twentyeight inches in length. When
an archer says his bow weighs thirtysix pounds, 
he means that it takes that much energy to pull a
twentyeight-inch arrow all the way back. If an archer
is 
an average-sized woman or a small man, the arrows
will be shorter, probably twentysix inches. Here the 
archer using a thirty-six-pound bow would not really
be pulling thirty-six pounds, but his bow is still 
referred to as a thirty-sixpounder.
The average sized male beginner should start with a
bow drawing between thirty and forty pounds, and 
the closer to thirty pounds the better. For a woman
or a boy, fifteen to twenty-five pounds would be a 
better choice. With such a bow, muscles can be
conditioned without strain and the bowman can 


--- Page 116 ---
--- Page 63 ---
concentrate on more important matters, besides being
able to practise more without tiring. The bow 
should feel comfortable in the hand, with a full
grip. It should be smooth on the draw with a uniform 
pressure when the string is pulled back and it should
be smooth when the arrow is released, without any 
shocking recoil.
It is important to maintain the proper distance from
the bow handle to the serving. This distance is
called 
the fistmele and it is approximately equal to the
distance between the bottom of the hand and the 
outstretched thumb. It can be adjusted by twisting
the bow string prior to stringing the bow.
THE ARROW
The arrow is in some ways more important than the
bow. It is possible to become a consistent shot with 
a relatively poor bow if you have good arrows. The
reverse is much more difficult. The length and spine 
are the two major characteristics of an arrow. The
length of the arrow is chosen to match the archer.
The 
figure below illustrates how this is done. The arrow
length is measured from the base of the pyle, or 
point, to the bottom of the nock. The length of a
broadhead hunting arrow is measured from a point 
three-quarters of an inch in front of the base of the
broadhead to the bottom of the nock. If a choice has 
to be made between arrows that are a little too short
and those that are a little too long, it is wise to
take 
arrows that are a little on the long side.
The spine of an arrow refers to the flexibility of
the shaft. The arrow must bend as it passes across
the 
bow. If the arrow has too much spine or not enough,
the bow will shoot to the right or the left. Better 
grades of arrows are matched for weight and spine.


--- Page 117 ---
They are also matched for the range of bow weights 
for which they are recommended. Wood, fiberglass, or
aluminum are three standard materials from 
which arrows are made. Wooden shafts are less
expensive than fiberglass or aluminum. They are 
suitable for both hunting and target shooting. They
are better for a novice because the tyro archer will 
damage and lose more arrows than the experienced
bowman.
In many ways the arrow is more important than the bow
for consistent accuracy.
Fiberglass arrows are preferred for hunting because
of their ruggedness and durability. Aluminum 
arrows are preferred for target shooting because they
are lighter in weight for a given stiffness in spine.
For this reason, they tend to be more precise.
It is advisable for a bow hunter to obtain a matched
set of arrow shafts. The target, field, and broadhead
(arrowhead) should be matched for weight. In this way
the balance and weight of arrows are constant 
during practice and hunting.
The more common types of points used are illustrated
below. The broadheads - hunting points - are 
about three inches long and one-and-aquarter inches
wide, made of tempered steel. They can have two, 
three, or four cutting edges which must be honed to
razor sharpness to insure proper killing efficiency. 
There is another type of arrowhead called the blunt.
This has a flat face. It is a hunting point for small
--- Page 64 ---
game who are killed by the shock of the arrow on
impact.
Arrow shafts are made of wood, fiberglass, and
aluminum. Arrows come with a variety of points such
as 


--- Page 118 ---
the target, field, fish, and several styles of
broadheads.
There is also a special arrow called the "flu-flu"
designed solely for wing shooting. It is fletched
with a 
fluffy cluster of feathers. This arrow is designed to
fly short distances accurately. The head on a flu-flu
is designed to transmit shock as well as to cut and
penetrate. Shooting game birds on the wing is a sport
only for the most skillful of archers.
ACCESSORIES
Bow strings. The best bow strings today are made of
dacronpolyester fibers. The novice should buy 
ready-made strings of suitable length for the length
and weight of his bow. Some experienced archers 
prefer to make their own bow strings. String-making
kits can be purchased. Incidentally, the bow is 
always unstrung when not in use.
Gloves, tips, and finger tabs are three types of
protective devices for the fingers of the string
hand. 
Leather finger tips are the most popular, but all
three devices are used. They are relatively
inexpensive 
so it is advisable for the beginner to try all three
to see which one he prefers and with which he shoots 
best. The important thing is to make certain that
these devices fit well and cause no discomfort.
Arm guards come in two styles. One is a sort of strip
guard reinforced with a steel stay and is strapped 
around the forearm. The other is a leather sleeve
which opens under spring tension when it is slipped 
over the forearm. Both styles are used for hunting
and for target shooting. Arm guards are used because 
a bow string repeatedly slapping the wrist will cause
flinching and hence poor release.
Quivers come in several styles - a belt quiver, a
plastic bow quiver which attaches to the bow and 


--- Page 119 ---
supposedly has the arrows ready for a quick shot, and
a leather-pouch type of quiver which is worn 
across the back. Again, experience will dictate your
preference.
Clothing for archers should be comfortable, soft, and
of camouflaged material. The archer needs all the 
help he can get in stalking within fifty yards or
less - dependable shooting range.
Archery requires patience and perseverance, not only
when hunting but also to become a reasonably 
good marksman. Generally bow hunters are above
average woodsmen. They have to be, or they will not 
be successful. I have also noticed that among bow
hunters there are few poor sportsmen. The discipline 
required for archery keeps the less desirable types
away from this sport.
CHAPTER 14
SNOWSHOES AND SNOWSHOEING
I stopped and looked down over the snow-covered
valley. The sun, just rising over the far ridge,
hurled 
--- Page 65 ---
its javelins of light onto the snow. It would be a
fine day for snowshoeing; a fine day for getting the
desk 
kinks out of my legs. As I tugged at the bindings on
my feet to make certain they were secure and had 
not loosened, I thought of the anthropological
heritage of the webbed foot.
In the forested northern regions of the world, the
discovery of the snowshoe must rank higher in 
importance than the discovery of the wheel. The
snowshoe made permanent settlement of the northern 
boreal regions feasible and less precarious. It made
it possible for Man to expand and inhabit areas 
where the snow depth presented an impossible barrier
to successful hunting and food gathering.
Snowshoes and skis share ancient common origins. They


--- Page 120 ---
were first used by the hunting peoples of 
central Siberia around 4000 B.C. The first
instruments were neither snowshoes nor skis as we
know 
them, but rather snowshoeskis of short, light planks.
It is difficult to know when they diverged, forming 
the webbed foot and the slim ski. But the snowshoe as
we know it had its greatest development on this 
continent, while the ski developed in the Old World.
The ancestors of our present-day Indians brought the
snowshoe with them when they crossed from 
Siberia into Alaska. Without snowshoes, the southward
expansion through Alaska would have been 
difficult. Similarly, without snowshoes, the
Athabaskan and Algonquin Indians would not have been 
able to expand into the northern forested zones of
this continent. Before the coming of the horse, the 
Indian tribes of the northern prairies depended
heavily on winter hunts for buffalo. In deep snow,
the 
bison were very vulnerable to men on snowshoes, who
could navigate in the deep snow.
The European settlers, notably the French, quickly
learned the value and use of snowshoes. The French-
Canadian fondness for snowshoes exists to this day.
It is doubtful if the northern portions of this 
continent would have been explored and settled by
Europeans as rapidly as they were without the 
snowshoe. The canoe was the principal mode of travel
of the early explorers, but they came for one 
thing - furs. Without the snowshoe, trapping would
have been difficult. Without fur, there would have 
been no incentive to explore.
Snowshoes are as indispensable to the modern trapper
today as they were to the Indian trappers and 
coureurs de bois of old. Every time an outdoorsman
dons a pair of snowshoes, he relives this ancient and
honorable lineage. His motivation may be different -
just a bit of exercise and a lungful of frosty forest


--- Page 121 ---
air - but an umbilical cord still binds him to the
past. The snowshoeing clubs of Quebec still cling to
the 
traditional clothing of the early colonists and
coureurs de bois on their outings. Traditions die
hard.
SELECTING SNOWSHOES
There are essentially five basic styles or shapes of
snowshoes. Understandably they have many 
variations and their names depend on where they are
used.
The Algonquin Style This is the most versatile and
useful type of snowshoe, and also the most popular. 
It is sometimes called the Maine or Michigan model.
The shape is a classical teardrop with a fairly long 
tail. The long tail serves to make the snowshoes
track in a straight line. It also makes these
snowshoes a 
--- Page 66 ---
bit tail-heavy, which helps in keeping the snowshoe's
toe up. The Algonquin is the best all-around 
choice. It is ideal for semi-open forests, but can
also be used effectively in heavy bush. It is a good
trail 
snowshoe.
The Pickerel Type This snowshoe is similar to the
Algonquin type, except that it is much longer and 
narrower and has a marked upturned toe. This snowshoe
is sometimes called the Alaskan, the Yukon, or 
the Western model. These snowshoes are fairly big and
ponderous, but they are very stable with no 
tendency to slip sideways. The distinctively upturned
toes make it difficult for this snowshoe to catch 
under a crust or on soft snow. The pickerel is an
ideal snowshoe for flat terrain and open woods where 
no fast turns will be needed. Because of its
stability, it is a good snowshoe for a very big and


--- Page 122 ---
heavy man. 
It is a very poor snowshoe for thick forest.
The Ojibway Type This is a fairly long snowshoe,
characterized by a pointed toe or tip, because the 
frame is made of two pieces of wood joined at the toe
and tail. This snowshoe is the easiest to make. The 
two-piece frame does not require the special steaming
to bend the wood that is needed for one-piece 
snowshoes.
The tip on Ojibway snowshoes is also upturned or
flared dramatically. This pointed tip has the 
advantage of cutting through snow and has no tendency
to fill up with snow. It is probable that 
snowshoes of this style were common among the Indians
because of their simpler construction.
The Bear Paw Type This is a "rounded" snowshoe with a
broad toe and no tail. The toe is fairly flat. The 
bear paw is a snowshoe for thick forests, where the
snowshoer has to make fast turns around obstacles. 
Bear paws have a tendency to slip sideways. Because
of its wide diameter, it is not particularly good for
hilly country.
The Beaver Tail Type This is an oval-shaped snowshoe
with no tail, and looks like an elongated bear 
paw. Its tip is upturned slightly. This snowshoe is
frequently called the modified bear paw, the Westover
bear paw, or the otter paw. It is a good choice for
heavily forested country and, because of its narrower
width, it is also a good choice for hilly country.
The beavertail is a very versatile snowshoe.
SNOWSHOE CONSTRUCTION
Snowshoes are made of wood with rawhide or synthetic
webbing, or of plastic or metal with rawhide or 
synthetic webbing. All of these materials have their
advantages and their weak points. My preference is 
for. the wooden frame. My reasons are probably
emotional, at least in part. Wooden frames are 


--- Page 123 ---
traditional. They also require a fair amount of hand
labor to make, and in our mechanized age, a man's 
skill with his hands is something that is rare and
should be valued. Wooden snowshoes cannot be mass 
produced like pieces of plastic.
However, wooden snowshoes require some care. They
must be varnished periodically. They should not 
be exposed to sudden heat, such as the back of the
stove, lest they warp. And because hand labor and 
even wood are costly, wooden snowshoes are more
expensive. Good wooden snowshoes cost about $35.
--- Page 67 ---
Plastic snowshoes are products of today's technology.
Generally they are made of polypropylene and are 
cast in one piece. Aesthetically they leave me cold.
Some of the earlier models of plastic snowshoes 
were slippery on crusted ice, but this has been
largely corrected. Most of the plastic snowshoes are 
designed along the bearpaw style, which gives them a
tendency to slip sideways. The big advantage of 
plastic snowshoes is their low price - about $15.
They are a good choice for snowmobilers as emergency 
equipment.
Snowshoes with tubular aluminum frames or even
magnesium frames are also available. Aluminum 
frames have the webbing stamped out of one piece of
rawhide, while magnesium frames have webbing 
of nylon covered cable. Magnesium framed snowshoes
are widely used by the military because of their 
durability. Army people claim that they are virtually
indestructible. Aluminum framed snowshoes are 
extremely light. Many snowshoers like them because of
this.
Rawhide, dried untanned hide from which the hair has
been scraped, is the traditional babiche or 
webbing for snowshoes. But it is seldom used today.
It is harder to obtain and, being a natural product,
it 


--- Page 124 ---
is not all that durable. Rawhide rots and
deteriorates. Rodents like to chew on it as well. I
understand 
that beaver skins make the best snowshoe rawhide, but
moose hides and bear and seal skins are also 
good. Cowhide, of course, was used most often. The
rawhide babiche had to be shellacked or varnished 
regularly to protect it from moisture.
The webbing on modern wooden snowshoes is usually of
a synthetic fiber. Nylon fabric with a dense 
coating of neoprene is generally considered best. The
synthetics are superior to rawhide. They are lighter 
and tougher, they do not rot, and mice do not eat
them. Also, once they are stretched tight on a frame,
they will not slacken if they get wet. Some of the
synthetics look very much like rawhide at first
glance.
WHAT TO LOOK FOR
The best wood for snowshoes is white ash. The
snowshoe frame should have no knots in it or other 
defects, and the grain should run straight. The
crossbars on the snowshoe should be mortised into the
frame tightly and neatly. There should be no sharp
edges anywhere that could cut the babiche with use 
and time.
On snowshoes with metal frames, the bends should be
smooth and even. If there are welded joints, be 
sure that they are sound and neat in appearance. This
is an indication of conscientious workmanship and 
tight production standards.
SNOWSHOE SIZE GUIDE
Weight of the Snowshoer         Approximate Snowshoe
Size
in Pounds                                in Inches
Bear Paw
--- Page 68 ---


--- Page 125 ---
        110-130         13x32
        130-160         13x34
        160-180         14x34
        180-200         15x34
        200 plus                15x36
Beaver Tail
        110-140         12x30
        140-180         12x34
        180 plus                12x38
Algonquin
        40-60           9x30
        60-90           11x36
        90-130          12x42
        130-160         12x48
        160-190         13x48
        190-220         14x48
        220 plus                14x52
Pickerel
        110-140         1 10x48
        140-180         1 10x56
        180 plus                12x60
The babiche, natural or synthetic, should be tight.
The webbing in the middle third of the snowshoe, 
between the crossbar, should be fairly coarse in
diameter. This is where the bulk of your weight will
be, 
so it must be strong. Pay particular attention to the
toe guard running just below the toe hole. It takes
up 
much of the shock. The webbing on the toe and heel is
generally lighter, made of finer strands.
Many experienced snowshoers have their favorite weave
patterns and styles. The coarser weaves are 
better for dense or crusted snow, while finer mesh is
better for loose and soft snow. However, this sort of
refinement need not concern you, as most snowshoes
today have some sort of "all-purpose" mesh for all 
kinds of snowshoeing conditions. This is fine for
most of us because essentially it is a compromise.


--- Page 126 ---
But I 
can see that for snowshoe races one would want the
best mesh for the prevailing snow conditions.
The toe hole is an important feature in comfortable
snowshoeing. As you snowshoe, the front of your 
foot should be able to move in and out of the toe
hole with each step. Make sure that the hole is wide 
and long enough for the boots or moccasins you will
be using.
The weight of the snowshoes is important. Lighter
snowshoes are easier to walk in, more comfortable, 
and less exhausting, but do not sacrifice lightness
for durability. There is a compromise here.
The weight of the snowshoer is also an important
consideration in selecting snowshoes. The following 
--- Page 69 ---
table will serve as a guide to matching the weight of
the snowshoer to the right size of snowshoes.
HARNESSES
There are several different harnesses available on
the market. The problem with harnesses is that a 
harness of one design is not equally suitable for
every type of terrain. I have tried at least five or
six 
different types but I have yet to find one that is
good for all snowshoeing conditions.
The most common binding, and the one I frequently
use, is a combination of a wide toe strap, a strap 
around the heel, and a strap over the instep. All of
these straps have individual buckles for tightening 
and adjusting. There are a number of variations of
this type of harness. Of the commercially made 
harnesses, this type is the best.
The old-time trappers and woodsmen used nothing but a
length of lampwick which went around the heel 
and a piece of leather band for the toes. This is
surprisingly effective, although you have to get 
accustomed to it. Of course, today you have to go far


--- Page 127 ---
into the bush to find coiled lampwick that you can 
buy by the yard, but nylon webbing works just as
well, even if it is not quite as romantic.
One of the most effective snowshoe harnesses is made
from the inner tubing of tires. There are two types 
of these "homemadeharnesses. One simply consists of a
wide leather toe strap with a strong rubber band 
cut circularly from a heavy truck tire tube to serve
as the heel strap. To put it on, you simply insert
the 
toe of your boot under the toe strap and stretch the
band over your heel and under the toe of your boot, 
but across the leather toe strap.
The big advantage of this type of harness, aside from
its low cost.is that you can slide out of your 
snowshoes with a twist of your boot This is a good
safety feature when you have to cross ice. Many 
trappers and woods workers use this type of harness
solely because of this. I may, indeed, owe my life to
this type of homemade harness.
Some years ago when a Cree Indian trapper, whose
trapline I was inspecting, broke his back and 
suffered severe chest injuries, I took off to get
medical help. To make time, I recklessly crossed
lakes 
and swamps that I would most certainly have avoided
under normal circumstances. My foolhardiness 
was exactly that. When crossing a wide beaver pond, I
broke through the ice. The fact that I was able to 
twist my snowshoes off quickly saved my life. After
drying myself off by a big fire, I was able to 
retrieve my snowshoes (which had floated up) with a
long pole and so continued my mission of mercy. 
The trapper, incidentally, survived.
Another type of tube harness and a more sophisticated
one is made entirely out of an inner tube, 
including the toe strap. This is an excellent
harness, particularly when made from heavy gauge
truck-tire 


--- Page 128 ---
inner tubes. The accompanying diagram shows how this
harness can be made. A snowshoe with this 
harness is just as fast to get off your foot as the
one I was wearing during my mishap, but this harness
is 
superior, particularly when hills have to be climbed.
--- Page 70 ---
FOOTWEAR
Choosing the right kind of footwear for snowshoeing
ranks close in importance to selecting the right 
snowshoe. High Indian moccasin, are hard to beat. The
main reason for this is that they lack heels and. 
ideally, footwear for snowshoeing should not have
heels.
All kinds of footwear have been tried and used by
snowshoers insulated rubber boots, packs with rubber 
bottoms and leather tippers, and even rubber
overshoes. The best of these contemporary types of 
footwear are snowmobile boots. Their felt linings are
warm and allow for the toe strap to be well 
tightened without creating a discomfort for the toes.
However, their big advantage is the lack of heels on 
most snowmobile boots, particularly the economy
priced boots. No doubt the reason why these boots 
lack good solid heels is because the designers do not
expect the users to do much walking.
OUTER GARMENTS
There is no "best" clothing for snowshoeing. The type
of weather expected dictates the type of clothing. 
I prefer to wear clothes in layers so that I can take
off extra clothing, such as shirts or sweaters. and
put 
them on as the temperature dictates. Trousers of
tightly woven wool are best. I like parkas or
anoracks 
that are windproof. These can be worn unzipped when
the weather turns warm. Two pairs of thin wool 
socks are better than one pair of thick socks. The


--- Page 129 ---
traditional headwear has always been a Quebec toque 
of brightly colored wool. The toque may be a bit warm
at times, but its serviceability is unquestionable.
OTHER EQUIPMENT
For traveling on slopes over crusty or packed snow,
crampon, (spiked, iron plates) are indispensable. 
They can be taken off and put on like automobile tire
chains. Many dedicated snowshoers make their 
own crampons, and some of the commercially sold
snowshoe harnesses have crampons built in. In 
emergencies, when I had to climb steep hills while
running compass lines in timber cruising.
I have even lashed short and sharp twigs to the
bottom of my snowshoes for better traction.
Some snowshoers use staffs while snowshoeing to help
them on hills and to give them better balance. 
Ski poles make excellent snowshoeing staffs. In hilly
country, an ice ax can be very useful, particularly 
when a longer handle is mounted on it with a ski-pole
basket attached at the lower end. This implement 
can be used as a staff and as an ice ax.
The only other things that snowshoers should carry
are: some stout cord, some electrical tape, and a 
folding knife. Any of these items might be needed to
make emergency repairs on snowshoes and 
harnesses while in the bush.
TIPS ON TRAVEL
Walking on snowshoes is as easy as walking on bare
ground. No training period and no practice are 
--- Page 71 ---
needed. This is one advantage that snowshoes have
over crosscountry skis. The beginner, the first time 
on snowshoes, will reach surprising proficiency after
the first dozen paces. About the only thing a 
neophyte snowshoer should keep in mind is to remember
to pick up his foot and move it over the edge 
of the stationary snowshoe, and place it down ahead
of the other snowshoe. Snowshoeing does not 


--- Page 130 ---
require any sort of cumbersome gait with the feet
abnormally far apart.
In breaking trails over new soft snow, the snowshoer
should keep the tip of his webs free of snow. The 
toe should ride high. The way to do this is to take
shorter steps. Snowshoes with long tails and upturned
tips have a built-in advantage. Sooner or later every
snowshoer falls. Generally this happens on slopes or 
when a snowshoe catches on small stubs, fallen
saplings, or other debris on the forest floor that
lie 
buried beneath a blanket of snow. A snowshoeing staff
or companion is handy at such a time to help you 
up. But neither is essential. Just make sure your
snowshoes are on a horizontal plane and kneel on them
to stand up. If you have a staff, you call use it to
support yourself. Small trees can sometimes be
useful. 
A companion can give you his hand and pull you up.
And in extreme cases, You may have to unbuckle 
your harnesses and move your snowshoes under you to
form a solid platform.
Snowshoeing up or down hill requires a bit more
experience. If the slopes are not steep, you can 
snowshoe up normally. Taking a short run, grasping
saplings offbrush, or using a staff can all help. 
Steeper slopes can be traversed by making g diagonal
tracks across the slope, just as in cross-country ski
touring. The length of the zig-zags will depend on
the steepness of the slope. Snowshoes should be 
edged so that they are on a horizontal plane. This is
not as easy as with skis because the snowshoes are 
wider. However, it is not at all difficult. Certainly
the narrower models are better for this.
Making turns on snowshoes is much easier than on
skis. You simply move one foot in the direction you 
want to turn and swing the other in front of it. The


--- Page 131 ---
tips of the snowshoes move the greatest distance, 
while the tails just pivot. To make a sharp turn, one
snowshoe is turned 180 degrees, and when it is 
solidly on the snow, the other is brought around
beside it.
Downhill travel can be done in several ways,
depending on the steepness of the slope and the
length of 
the hill. Harnesses have to be tight for downhill
travel so that the toe of the boot will not slide
under the 
crosspiece on the snowshoe. If this happens, the
snowshoer is likely to fall. If the slope is not too
steep, 
you can walk straight down the hill by keeping your
body weight slightly back.
The tails of the snowshoes should always be firmly
planted first. The steps should be deliberate, almost
planned.
A snowshoeing staff is handy when walking downhill.
Trees, saplings, and large brush can also be used 
to help you down and to slow your momentum. On hills
with no obstructions, one can slide down by 
sitting or crouching on the back of the snowshoes.
The younger snowshoers can also run down hills, and 
if the dropoff is a short one and the snow is deep
and soft, you can even jump. Jumping on snowshoes is 
fairly easy and, in my opinion, quite safe.
SNOWSHOEING HAZARDS
--- Page 72 ---
Snowshoeing over ice can be hazardous. However, a man
on snowshoes can cross ice that would break 
under the weight of a man walking without snowshoes.
After all, the entire working principle of 
snowshoes is that they distribute weight over a wider
area.
No one should snowshoe across ice if it is less than


--- Page 132 ---
two thick. Avoid traveling across inlets where a 
stream flows into a lake. The ice may be thin here
because of the current. Boggy pondq can also be 
hazardous because the ice may be soft and spongy due
gases. Relatively fast-moving streams are also 
hazardous to escaping because of thin ice.
When crossing a lake or pond, loosen your harnesses
and use only the boot toe and toe strap to hold your 
snowshoe on. This makes walking on snowshoes a little
trickier. You have to take shorter steps and not 
lift your snowshoes quite as high. But if the ice
does give way under you, the snowshoes can be kicked 
off instantly. A lone snowshoer should cut a fairly
long, slim sapling and carry it by the middle with
him 
when crossing lakes or streams. Again. if the ice
breaks under you, the sapling will hold you up.
A group of snowshoers should always have a line with
them, at least thirty feet long. This line can be 
attached to the lead man who tests the ice and breaks
the trail when crossing a lake or river. Any ice that
does not crack is very likely to be solid and safe.
Walking across frozen lakes and rivers safely
requires 
prudence and caution. and a little common sense. Only
when a snowshoer is in a hurry or is careless, do 
mishaps occur.
A snowshoer and a ski tourer in mountainous country
should be careful of avalanches or snowslides. 
Generally avalanches occur after a heavy snowfall on
the hard old snow of steep slopes, or when there is 
a spring thaw. Overhanging cornices of snow on
concave cliffs also start avalanches when they fall. 
Generally avalanches are triggered by shock waves of
sound, by a traveler on skis, snowshoes. or 
snowmobile, or a sudden change in temperature.
Usually in mountain country there are avalanche
warnings in the news media, so if you are planning a 
snowshoeing trip where avalanches occur, listen to


--- Page 133 ---
news broadcasts. In skiing country, there is a good 
network of avalanche warnings. Otherwise use a bit of
caution. Snowshoe in areas that are sheltered 
from snowslides.
Snowshoeing is increasing in popularity. It may not
be enjoying quite the same sort of boom as ski 
touring, but more people are snowshoeing today than
since the days of old. Snowshoes have some 
inherent advantages over cross-country skis. First,
they are cheaper. Second, cross-country skis are less
suitable for working or doing something other than
ski touring because you have to use ski poles. In 
snowshoeing, your hands are free. A snowshoeing staff
is not really needed. I very seldom use one. If I 
need one to climb a hill. I cut a handy branch or a
sapling. (Of course, cutting a staff would not be 
possible in a heavily used winter recreation area,
lest the area become devoid of branches and
saplings.)
Snowshoes are superior to cross-country skis when
traveling in thick bush such as spruce and cedar 
swamp. They are also superior when a heavy load has
to be carried, as well as for ice fishing or hunting.
--- Page 73 ---
And, of course, snowshoes are easier to use because
there is no learning period.
CHAPTER 15
THE ABC'S OF SKI TOURING
One of the finest ways to get out-of-doors in the
winter is on cross-country skis. Cross-country ski 
touring has brought a new dimension to the out-of-
doors. In just a few years, it has mushroomed into 
one of the more popular winter sports. Anyone who
loves the out-of-doors in winter will enjoy ski 
touring.
Cross-country skis are just as silent as snowshoes,


--- Page 134 ---
but they allow the traveler to move faster and to
cover 
more ground. They are also less fatiguing because
they are lighter, and you do not have to lift your
feet 
to move them forward. You can simply slide the ski.
Cross-country skis are more graceful than 
snowshoes.
Many people who take up ski touring are interested in
it as sport in itself, but my interest lies in the
fact 
that it enables me to get out-of-doors more easily
and more comfortably than on snowshoes. 
Photography, wildlife study, and bird watching are
all possible on cross-country skis. Winter camping 
using light backpacking equipment and freeze-dried
foods is also possible. As I am writing this chapter,
two friends of mine are making preparations to go on
a moose hunt in northern Ontario on cross-country 
skis. Norwegian and Finnish hunters use their cross-
country skis in winter hunts for ptarmigan, hares. 
and even caribou. Finnish trappers patrol their
traplines not on snowshoes but on cross-country skis.
Cross-country ski touring may be relatively new to
this continent but, as a sport. it is at least a
century 
old, with its roots firmly embedded in the thin soil
of the Scandinavian hills and forests. It is
certainly 
older than alpine skiing.
Traveling on skis goes back many centuries. Skis were
invented by the hunting tribes of Siberia and 
from there spread westward into what is now
Scandinavia. The Swedes learned about skis from the 
Finns and Lapps during the height of the Norsemen
era. Skis were used solely as a method of winter 
transportation - for hunting and for war.
Military training was the springboard for skis as an


--- Page 135 ---
object of recreation. By the late eighteenth century,
skiing became a sport, but it was not until the
middle of the nineteenth century that it became
popular. 
Generally Norway is credited as being the cradle of
ski touring, and skiing in general. Cross-country ski
touring is a far cry from downhill alpine skiing. The
techniques are different. The equipment is different.
Even the attitudes of ski tourers and downhill skiers
are different.
EQUIPMENT
Cross-country skis are longer and narrower than
downhill skis. They range from special mountain 
tourers, which are three inches wide and weigh six
pounds, to narrow racing skis that are a mere two 
inches wide and weigh three pounds. For general
purpose ski touring, a ski of about two-and-a-half 
inches is the best bet. Length is determined by the
ski tourer's height. To get the right length, raise
your 
--- Page 74 ---
arm straight up over your head and measure from the
middle of your hand to the floor. But if you are 
heavily boned and weigh above average for your
height, choose skis in the next length group.
Cross-country skis are made from laminated woods. The
better skis have several dozen laminations to 
prevent warping. The sole of the ski should be of
very hard wood, with hickory being the best. The 
edges of high-quality skis are reinforced with
lingostone. Watch for warpage when buying cross-
country 
skis. Lay the skis on a straight bare floor to make
sure that they are not twisted or warped. Cross-
country 


--- Page 136 ---
skis for general touring cost from $25 to $50.
Boots There are a number of different cross-country
ski boots on the market. The main feature that 
distinguishes these from alpine ski boots is their
flexibility and light weight. Special skis also
require 
special light and low-cut boots resembling a track
shoe. For general ski touring, a full boot is the
best 
choice. It is warmer and better at keeping your feet
dry. Lightness is an important factor to consider 
when buying boots. Boots made of composition rubber
soles vulcanized to the upper parts are the driest. 
Good, serviceable boots can be purchased for about
$20.
Bindings The boots and bindings should be purchased
together to ensure that they are compatible. There 
are essentially two styles of bindings - the cable-
around-the-heel and the pin. The pin binding is 
generally used for racing and requires a boot in
which the soles project forward. The binding is
attached 
through a pair of holes in the sole.
The cable-around-the-heel bindings are used for
touring and mountaineering. They require a boot with
a 
groove in the heel. These bindings come in two major
styles - the Kandahar and the Tempo. Both have 
their advantages and disadvantages. Tempo is probably
the best choice for ski touring, particularly for 
the beginner. Good cable-around-the-heel bindings can
be purchased for about $12 to $16.
Poles Ski poles are made of cane, fiberglass, and
aircraft-alloy tubing. The latter are the lightest
and 
most expensive. They are also the toughest. Cane
poles are still a good choice. They are strong and
light 
and are the least expensive. Fiberglass poles are
also good and cost somewhere between the cane and 


--- Page 137 ---
metal poles. The basket on cross-country poles should
be fairly large, particularly if you intend to travel
in forested country where snow might be fluffy and
loose. The metal tips on the poles should curve 
forward and should be very sharp. Poles run from
about $8 to $20.
Rucksacks or Knapsacks The cross-country ski tourer
will need some sort of lightweight rucksack to 
carry a wax kit, some lunch, a tea pot, some extra
clothing, and possibly a camera and film. If he is 
going on long tours, replacement tips for the skis
will also be needed. Rucksacks can be purchased from 
$6 to $25 depending on size, quality, and material.
Clothing Ski-touring clothes should be light in
weight. If you expect to be moving about constantly,
then 
the clothing need not be heavily insulated. The
exercise will keep you warm. The thing to avoid is
bulky 
or loose clothing that may catch on branches and
shrubs. You should also avoid clothing that will not 
breathe properly and trap all of your perspiration on
the inside.
--- Page 75 ---
Knickers are traditional for cross-country skiing.
However, light wool trousers are just as good for 
general touring, particularly in woods. Such trousers
are more versatile, but knickers are good because 
they allow easy movement. A light wool shirt and a
sweater are a good combination when used with a 
light, windproof nylon shell. The choice of
undergarments is wide. Fishnet underwear is
excellent. Long 
underwear will not be needed except in very cold
weather.
In cold weather a woollen toque is hard to beat but
in mild weather it is probably too warm and will 


--- Page 138 ---
cause your head to sweat. A simple headband is
adequate then. A balaclava is needed only for
extremely 
severe cold such as that encountered in high
mountains. Light woollen gloves are ideal for milder 
weather, if gloves are needed. Woollen mittens are
warmer in cold weather and are just as efficient as 
gloves. The ski tourer should always wear two pairs
of socks - a long thick pair of woollen socks on top 
of a soft pair of cotton socks. If you intend to wear
knickers, the socks, of course, must come to the
knee.
Anklets and Gaiters Anklets and gaiters are the only
specialized clothing needed for ski touring. Anklets 
are worn at all times except in deep, soft snow,
where gaiters are better because they will keep you
drier. 
Gaiters should have zippers in the backs so that they
can be put on after the boots. The base of the 
gaiters should have nylon drawstrings or leather
straps so that they can be tied under the instep of
the 
boot. The best gaiters are made of soft canvas.
Anklets should fit snugly around the top of the ankle
and 
around the boot. They should have elastic for the
instep of the boots.
Presuming that one owns a suitable shirt and sweater,
the other pieces of clothing for ski touring will 
cost between $30 and $40. From these costs we can see
that one can become well equipped and clothed 
for the sport of cross-country skiing for about $100.
People on limited budgets could even do it for 
twenty-five or thirty percent less. I have seen skis,
poles, boots, and bindings sold as sets for $55 in 
some of the larger department stores.
TECHNIQUES
The first step is to get the feel of the skis on your
feet. Move around. Flex your feet. Pick up the skis
by 


--- Page 139 ---
raising your feet. Kneel down. Then begin practising
the simple step-around turns by lifting one ski and 
moving to one side, and then following with the other
ski. Coordinate this movement with movements of 
your poles. Practise this backwards. These exercises
will help you to become fully relaxed on your skis.
The Diagonal Stride The diagonal stride is the basic
maneuver in cross-country ski touring. Begin 
practising your stride on level ground, preferably on
a trail broken by other skiers. Move out as if you 
were walking, sliding your skis at each step. Keep
your body straight and erect, and transfer your
weight 
from one ski to another in a smooth, rhythmic
fashion. All this is easy. A couple of hours of
practice will 
give you a fair degree of proficiency.
Now, gradually increase your stride by putting more
movement into the sliding ski. The easiest way to 
achieve this is by forcing the forward leg out each
time, so that it forms an acute angle at the knee. At
first, your legs will tire rapidly because you are
making muscles work that are normally unused.
--- Page 76 ---
To a degree, the more you make your sliding-ski
slide, the stronger your basic maneuver will be. The 
key to your efficiency lies in developing good
rhythm. Once you have achieved good rhythm on your 
skis, you can go on to the diagonal stride. Without
learning this stride, you are really only running on 
your skis and no one can endure this for great
distances or maintain any speed.
The diagonal stride consists of applying force to the
opposite pole in order to maximize the slide of the 
skis across the snow. By having long glides, you
minimize movements and energy outputs, hence you 
lessen fatigue. The poles do not actually exert a


--- Page 140 ---
great deal of power, but they act as timing and
balancing 
mechanisms. The basic movements are these:
Thrust one leg forward along with the opposite arm,
and plant the pole ahead of the foot and about ten 
inches to the side. Put all your weight on the
forward ski as it slides out. As the forward slide
begins to 
diminish, put pressure on the planted pole and draw
the rear ski forward as quickly as possible, bringing
the other pole forward to repeat the cycle. The whole
idea is to increase the length of the glide by 
kicking with the rear leg. To achieve this, you must
learn to maintain proper balance, leaning slightly 
forward and with the knees slightly bent.
The Kick Turn The kick turn is the basic maneuver for
changing direction. It can be done on level 
ground or on a slope, if the skier is perpendicular
to the fall line. The fall line is the shortest line
down 
the hill. To make a kick turn, bring one ski forward
and up so that its tail is embedded in the snow half 
way between the boot and the tip of the other ski.
When the ski is almost vertical, it can be rotated
and 
put down facing in the opposite direction of the
second ski. The other ski is then picked up and
crossed 
over the first ski, and placed beside the first ski.
You have now made a 180-degree turn in direction. 
Poles are used in this maneuver to help maintain
balance. The kick turn is actually quite easy to
perform 
once you have become accustomed to your skis. With
the kick turn, you can traverse almost any slope.
Downhill Techniques Sliding downhill on cross-country
skis is not at all difficult, but it does require 
practise and total familiarity with these light skis.
For straight downhill running, the best stability is 


--- Page 141 ---
obtained with a wide stance. Poles can be used to
help with balancing. It is also best to run downhill 
with one ski slightly ahead of the other. The same
type of crouch can be used as in alpine skiing.
Straight downhill runs can also be done in the
telemark position. In this position, the torso of the
skier is 
almost vertical. The forward ski should form a right
angle with the leg and the knee, while the knee of 
the other leg lies close to the trailing ski so that
the shin is almost parallel to it, This position is
best in 
soft, windblown snow. when conditions are
unpredictable. It is also good over uneven and bumpy 
ground.
Downhill turns can be achieved by edging or by a step
turn. To make an edge turn, the skier simply 
rotates his ankles so that the edge of the ski will
knife into the snow. This will cause him to move
swiftly 
in that direction. When making an edge turn, the skis
should be close together to minimize the chances 
of failing. The poles again are used to help balance
the skier.
--- Page 77 ---
Edge turns should be practised on gentle slopes
first. They are most useful in deep snow. Once you
have 
mastered them, you will find that they are a good way
of turning.
The step turn is the basic turn of cross-country ski
touring. To make this turn, the skier crouches with
his 
knees bent and his weight on the heels of his skis.
He then, picking up one ski at a time, moves to the 
right or left with short steps. Since with each step
he is actually pushing off with the trailing ski, the


--- Page 142 ---
skier's speed is increased. Thi's is frequently very
disconcerting to the tyro. However, it need not be.
It is 
again a good idea to practise the step turn on gentle
slopes before taking on steep ones.
To control speed, cross-country ski tourers can use
the step turns or Christianias of the alpine skiers,
or 
the snow plow, in which the skis form a V at the tip.
For this, the skier should place his weight well back
on his heels and bring his knees forward.
There are other downhill techniques that the cross-
country skier can use, such as the pole-jump turn,
the 
telemark turn, the ski glosside using the poles to
act as brakes on descending narrow trails. and so on,
but they are beyond the scope of this brief
introductory chapter.
Uphill Techniques The cross-country skier soon learns
that the shortest route is not always the fastest. It
is frequently faster to go around a hill than to
climb it. Also it is sometimes faster to select
longer but 
gentler slopes on hills, This is much like deciding
between shooting the rapids or portaging. Shooting 
the rapids may save time. but if you swamp the canoe,
you will have to spend half a day trying to 
salvage and dry your gear.
One way to climb a slope is by traversing it. By
edging the skis, the ski tourer makes a level track. 
Diagonal strides can also be used to go up gentle
slopes, but the slides must be kept short. Traversing
here will also help. On steep slopes, the side step
is the easiest. It is certainly easier than the V-
shaped 
herringbone step. In the side step, the ski tourer


--- Page 143 ---
simply moves up the hill sideways, keeping the skis 
across the slope. The poles are used for balance and
support.
The only other techniques required of the cross-
country ski tourer involve crossing obstacles. In
most 
cases, this is largely a matter of common sense and
convenience. When crossing bare roads and 
highways, skis should be taken off and carried.
Every cross-country skier must expect to take falls.
Obviously beginners will fall more frequently. One 
of the secrets of failing is to learn to relax and
not stiffen up. This is why professional wrestlers
and stunt 
men seldom ever get hurt, even when they fall. The
second thing is to learn to control the fall. If 
possible, try to fall on soft snow on the side of the
trail rather than on packed snow. Failing flat on
your 
face, surprisingly enough, is frequently the safest.
The cross-country bindings offer enough flexibility
to 
allow you to fall to the side. Dropping back on your
skis may cause a broken ski, but it may be the safest
way to fall on steep, brushy slopes.
WAXING CROSS-COUNTRY SKIS
--- Page 78 ---
Correct waxing is one of the secrets of cross-country
ski touring. Correctly waxed skis allow the tourer 
to ski down a slope as well as climb a twenty-degree
slope without side stepping.
Different snow conditions require different waxing
techniques. This presents immediate problems, 
because snow conditions can change in the course of a
day. It is easier to wax for fresh snow than for 
old, icy snow or wet snow. There are a number of
waxing kits on the market, many of which give 


--- Page 144 ---
instructions and have guides for what waxes to use
and how. To become proficient at waxing skis takes 
a fair amount of ski-touring experience and a bit of
experimentation. There is no other way around it.
It is impossible to cover all the techniques and
methods of ski touring in one short introductory
chapter. 
Anyone who is interested in the sport should purchase
a good book on the subject. There are a number 
of reasonably priced paperbacks on ski touring on the
market. One of the best is Edward Baldwin's 
Cross-Country Skiing Handbook.
CHAPTER 16
THE BASICS OF SNOWMOBILING
There is no doubt that the power toboggan has
revolutionized winter outdoor recreation throughout
the 
northern portion of this continent. Alas, not all its
effects have been beneficial. Snowmobiling has had 
its growing pains. Harassment of wildlife,
destruction of young trees, cutting of wire fences,
trespassing 
on private property, and littering, have caused
problems. But in the last few years, there have been
many 
indications that snowmobile enthusiasts are showing
signs of maturity. Through public education, the 
formation of snowmobile clubs, and the establishment
of snowmobile trails, snow mobile misuse and the 
poor outdoor manners of snowmobilers have declined.
Although I am not a big snowmobile booster, I do
recognize their value. They have opened up vast 
stretches of the northern woods that no one ever
traveled during the winter months. I admit to a 
preference for snowshoes and cross-country skis, but
I use a snowmobile as well. A snowmobile enables 
me to fish remote lakes. I have also used a
snowmobile to carry me quickly into the backwoods,
and 
then snowshoed to points of interest.


--- Page 145 ---
The snowmobile has made the work of many woods
workers much easier. I know of northern Canadian 
trappers who can, with a snowmobile, live at home
with their families and cover their traplines with 
ease. It enables them to travel greater distances,
spreading out the harvest of raw furs over a wider
area. 
It has even helped to establish humane trapping
methods. How? A trapper now can easily carry the big 
and bulky Conibear traps that kill instantly. This
was difficult to do when a man had to walk everywhere
on snowshoes.
Although I know how to operate a snowmobile
efficiently and safely, I do not consider myself an
expert 
in the field. To write this chapter, I sought the
advice of the snowmobiling experts of the Outboard 
Marine Corporation, manufacturers of several brands
of snowmobiles.
DRIVING A SNOWMOBILE
--- Page 79 ---
It takes only a few minutes to master the basic
controls of a snowmobile. As all models differ
slightly 
from one another, study the owner's manual for your
specific machine before trying the machine out. For 
a beginner, the best place to practise is in the wide
open spaces. Fields, snow-covered frozen lakes, or 
any other large space you can find that is free of
trees and other obstructions is a good place to
practise. 
And as with any form of sport, practice makes
perfect. Snowmobiles are in their element off the
road. 
Snowmobiling is the most fun after a medium snowfall
(six to twelve inches). Extremely hard packed 
snow or glaring ice make for tricky handling.


--- Page 146 ---
Balance and track contact are the two basic things to
watch when handling a snowmobile. Once you 
have these mastered, you can tackle steep grades,
traverse hillsides, and twist through wooded areas
with 
your vehicle under total control. During your
learning hours, play it safe. The principle of
balance is 
quite simple. On rolling terrain or on the side of a
hill, the snowmobile has a tendency to tip. You must 
be ready to shift your weight to counteract this
tendency. For example, if you are climbing a steep
slope, 
you will probably have to lean "into the hill" to
maintain balance.
Track contact is the second important consideration.
The turning action of the track provides the forward 
movement of the machine. If the snowmobile banks too
far to the left or right, it will lose partial or
total 
contact with the snow surface, and the results will
be the same as jacking up the rear wheels of a car. 
You can apply all the gas you want, but you will not
be going very far. You are just spinning the track 
and not obtaining maximum power.
Snowmobilers have developed three driver positions to
attain best balance and track contact. The sitting 
position is the most common. followed by kneeling and
standing. In the kneeling position, the driver 
places his right knee on the seat and his left foot
on the running board. In the standing position, he 
straddles the seat, placing both feet on the running
boards. You should try all three positions and choose
the one that gives you maximum control and permits
quick shifting of weight.
Turning The most important maneuver in snowmobiling
is turning. Turning a snowmobile is a lot like 
turning a bike or motorcycle. The more you lean into
a turn with your body, the sharper will be the turn. 


--- Page 147 ---
One thing to remember when turning is that you have
got to have enough power to keep moving. Too 
little throttle and you will stall your turn. Try a
few figure 8's with at least a forty-foot diameter in
each 
loop. Go slowly at first, gradually building up speed
on repeated runs until you feel the machine start to 
"slip" sideways. This can be controlled by either
easing off or increasing the throttle opening. A
little 
experimentation will tell you how much power you will
need for different snow conditions.
Now try a series of left and right turns along a
straight course, like a slalom skier. Just as you
found 
when you first started to drive a car, turning in one
direction will be easier. When you find your weak 
side, practise turning on it a little more than on
the other side.
General Riding Tips Most snowmobiles were made to
carry two people the driver and one passenger. 
The heavier the load on a snowmobile, the less
performance you will get from it. When you are
cruising 
in the woods, watch out for tree branches, snow-
covered logs or hidden snow-filled depressions, and 
--- Page 80 ---
other hazards that could upset your machine. Dips or
holes have a way of becoming nearly invisible 
during the late afternoon when the light becomes
poor. Be careful driving at this time. Use goggles
with 
amber lenses for flat light conditions and smoke-
colored lenses for glare light conditions.
Plan ahead. When you drive up a hill, remember that
you have to come down that hill too. If the hill is 
very steep, you should have a good plan as to how to
get down. On very steep hills it is a good idea to 


--- Page 148 ---
"traverse" the hill on the way down by making shallow
sweeps across the face of the slope, progressing 
thirty feet vertically with each sweep.
Test the snow conditions before setting off on any
trip. What was true of yesterday's snow is not always
true of today's. An overnight freeze or snowfall can
bring surprises. Before taking off, try a few turns 
and stops. You will get a better feeling of the trail
and you will have more fun.
Lower your speed in unfamiliar territory, keeping an
eye peeled for obstacles. If you are riding double, 
both people must be on the alert to maintain good
balance. The person riding behind the driver should
be 
prepared to shift his weight at any time to
counteract a lean when crossing rolling terrain.
Traveling on ice and on hard-packed surfaces can be
tricky. If the surface is too slick, the track may 
have difficulty making good solid contact. You can
prevent this by starting out slowly and building up 
speed gradually. If the track starts to slip, retard
the throttle slightly and try again. Practise with
shifting 
body weight and the proper use of the throttle and
brakes and soon you will have mastered most snow 
conditions.
BE WELL EQUIPPED
For minor emergencies that may arise, you should be
well equipped on any snowmobile outing. You 
should always carry a tool kit in including a spare
drive belt, spark plugs, a plug wrench, an adjustable
wrench, pliers, a screwdriver, electrician's tape,
your owner's manual, and a tow rope.
As on any outing in the out-of-doors, it is a good
idea to carry a map of the area where you are 
snowmobiling, as well as a compass (it is easy to
become disoriented on a snowy day), a first-aid kit,
an 


--- Page 149 ---
ax, a good quality knife, and a container of
windproof and water proof matches.
If you plan a long trip strap a pair of snowshoes
onto the snowmobile for each passenger. Carry an 
emergency fuel supply!
A lightweight block and tackle with up to fiftty feet
of rope may mean the difference between getting 
your snowmobile going again if badly mired, or
abandoning it.
BE PROPERLY DRESSED
Snowmobiling will not be much fun if you are not
properly dressed. In fact, improper dress can be a 
hazard in this sport. Of course your
--- Page 81 ---
The snowmobiler should be well dressed in a windproof
suit, warm boots, gloves, and, ideally, a helmet. 
Shatterproof snow goggles are also a good, safe way
to protect your eyes from sun glare and flying ice.
Snowmobile clothing must be warm and windproof, and
it should be as waterproof as possible. It should 
also be light and flexible and not too tight. You
must have freedom of movement in order to handle your
machine properly.
Many people prefer the insulated one-piece suits,
snug at the ankles, wrists, and neck. Others find the
two-piece suits (coat and pants) more convenient.
Insulated boots should be worn, and these boots 
should be as waterproof as possible. The boots should
also have non-skid soles and a drawstring top in 
order to keep out snow.
A face mask of some sort is essential for sub-zero
weather. Face masks come in many varieties and 
some look pretty weird, but when snowmobiling,
comfort comes first. Thermal underwear and socks, 
and heavy mitts with wool liners will protect you in
severe cold. Heavy gloves or mitts are also useful 


--- Page 150 ---
for pushing away branches when driving through the
woods.
When operating a snowmobile in especially rugged
areas or woods it is a good idea to wear a helmet 
over a woollen liner to protect your head from
injury. The glare of the sun off the snow often
dictates the 
use of tinted, shatterproof goggles. Goggles also
protect the eyes against wind and against branches
and 
twigs when driving through wooded areas.
Always try to keep clothing and footwear dry. When
you get off your machine to exercise, take care not 
to get overheated. If you perspire, you will be
colder later on. If it becomes necessary, loosen your
clothing to allow warm air to escape.
It is extremely important that you do not wear long
scarves or mufflers that may leave loose ends flying 
in the breeze. There is always a chance that these
loose ends may get caught in the drive train or the 
track, with disastrous results.
Watch for frostbite when out in temperatures of zero
or below, or even above zero if the wind is strong. 
Use the buddy system to spot the telltale white spots
on the exposed flesh of ears, cheeks, or noses of 
your companions. Minor frostbites will respond
quickly to the thawing effect of a warm hand or other
heat. Refrain from rubbing a frostbitten spot, as
this may damage frozen skin tissue but will certainly
cause severe chapping.
SNOWMOBILE SAFETY
Some preliminary precautions to take when using a
snowmobile are: stay physically fit; know your 
equipment; plan your activities in advance; wear
proper clothing; check the weather forecast before 
venturing any distance; and remember that alcohol and
snowmobiles don't mix. Staying physically fit is 


--- Page 151 ---
--- Page 82 ---
of primary importance because below-zero weather
lowers human efliciency and you must always bear 
in mind that if you break down you may have to walk.
Check the throttle and brake controls on your machine
before starting out. Be sure both move freely 
without sticking. A frozen throttle could send your
snowmobile out of the starting gate like a cannon, 
and it could injure you and others. Check your
headlights and tall lights if traveling at night.
Carry a 
flashlight as a backup device.
Be sure you have plenty of fuel. Carry an emergency
fuel supply. Travel with other people. Particularly 
in unfamiliar territory it Is good to have at least
one other machine with you. In fact, one of the best 
ideas is to join a local snowmobile club. You will
have lots of fun and you can learn from other 
snowmobilers. If you are pulling a sled or toboggan,
use a rigid tow-bar to prevent rear-end collisions on
sudden stops.
Do not willfully jump your vehicle. Even the experts
have difficulty in controlling machines whose skis 
and track are air-borne.
When you are a newcomer, whether to the area or to
the sports stick to established trails. Marked trails
have been provided in many parks, national forests,
and conservation areas for your convenience. By 
following them, you reduce the possibilities of
having ail accident or trespassing on private
property.
If you get off trails, travel with caution in unknown
areas. Snow camouflages many unexpected changes 
in terrain. Match your speed to the terrain.
Traveling too fast over rough snow surfaces increase,
the 


--- Page 152 ---
chance of unpleasant spills. Tipping over into soft
snow may be part of the fun, but a spill at high
speed 
can be dangerous.
Never cross rivers or unknown lakes at night. At all
times, use extreme caution when traveling on ice. 
Currents and weather conditions can make ice unsafe.
Breaking through thin ice is a major cause serious 
snowmobile accidents. Unexpected skids on ice are
also dangerous.
If YOU stay on marked trails, you will not travel on
roadways
railroad right-of-ways. These were not created for
snowmobiles and
should not be used by them. If it is necessary to
cross a roadway or
a railway track, stop your snowmobile and make a
thorough check
for any traffic Then cross at right angles as quickly
as possible. Avoid
collisions with other snowmobiles by throttling down
at trail inter
sections and when other snowmobiles are approaching
from an angle
Keep a sensible distance behind other snowmobiles
when traveling in a group. Tailgating causes bent 
skis, broken tail lights, and ever. personal
injuries.
If you become mired in deep snow, be patient. Never
take a chance slipping under the track when 
pushing the machine with the track running. If others
are helping you, do not let them tug on the ski 
--- Page 83 ---
while you run the vehicle. It could come out of the
snow suddenly and injure them. If your track needs 
clearing, do not let anyone lift the tail while
standing behind it, while you are running the track
ahigh 


--- Page 153 ---
speed. Projectiles hurling off a spinning track can
be extremely dangerous,
Know wind-chill hazards and avoid frostbite. Wear a
protection face mask if it is very cold. Numbness is 
generally the first sign of frostbite. If you feel
this condition, stop and warm yourself before the
frostbite 
becomes serious.
Even if you consider yourself an expert at driving
your snowmobile its trailer, a winch is a much better
idea. Many injuries and damaged automobile trunks
have resulted from "experts" driving onto their 
trailers. Once your snowmobile is on the trailer,
make sure it is tied down securely.
CHAPTER 17
GIVE THE COOK A CHANCE
One of the bonuses of such outdoor pastimes as
fishing and hunting is fish and game for the dinner
table. 
No store purchase can duplicate the delicacy of a
shore lunch of freshly caught walleye or brook trout.
No supermarket chicken can compare to pheasant or
ruffed grouse. And steaks of moose or caribou 
broiled over hardwood coals or charcoal on the patio
barbecue can be much more flavorful than beef 
produced in modern feedlots and pumped full of
antibiotics and specially designed feed to accelerate
their growth.
TAKING CARE OF YOUR CATCH
I learned when very young that the faster a fish is
put into the frying pan and onto the fire after it is
caught, the better it tastes. Fish, unlike game, does
not improve with aging. Of course it is not always 
feasible or possible to cook fish right after they
have been caught, but a shore meal of fresh fish is a


--- Page 154 ---
delightful part of fishing and the outdoors. Fish
deteriorate and lose their fine flavor very quickly
after 
being caught if they are not properly handled. To let
any fish deteriorate to the point where it is a poor 
meal is a shame. It would have been better to let the
fish go to reproduce and to fight another day. To let
a fine game fish spoil so that it is unfit for human
consumption is literally a crime. If you let this
happen 
you are a disgrace to the fraternity of fishermen.
Letting fish spoil is against the law almost across
the 
entirety of the United States and Canada.
But it is not surprising that so many fishermen do
not like to eat fish. If I treated fish the way they
do, I 
would not like it either. Yet it is almost as easy to
take care of fish properly as it is improperly.
One of the worst culprits is the fish stringer. Often
by the time the fish are taken off to be cleaned,
they 
have already deteriorated in quality. The warm
surface temperature of the water in the summer months
kills and spoils fish quickly. Any fish that
struggles for a long time before dying or being
killed will not 
be in as good a condition as one that is killed
immediately. A far better gadget than a stringer for 
keeping fish alive is a collapsible fish keeper made
of plastic hoops and nylon netting. In such a sack, 
fish will live for hours or even days.
--- Page 84 ---
If a fish stringer is all you have, do not string the
fish through the gill slit. You will injure tile
gills and 


--- Page 155 ---
the fish will die much faster. String the fish
through the lower jaw by puncturing a hole. Do not
drag 
your fish behind your boat at fast speeds, while
moving from one spot to another. When you do this to
a 
fish, its gills cannot function. It cannot breathe
and so it suffocates.
The best way to keep fish is on ice. That is how
commercial fishermen do it, and they manage to keep 
their fish fresh and firm. In summer, every fisherman
should have an ice chest with him, filled with 
chipped ice. When a fish is caught, it should be
killed immediately by rapping it sharply on the head 
with a stick and then buried in the ice. Ideally the
fish should be dressed - gutted and gills removed. 
Certainly big fish should always be gutted.
Do not let the fish in your ice chest slip down into
the melted water. Keep the spigot on the chest open. 
A wooden rack made of dowelling for the bottom of the
ice chest is a good way to keep fish out of any 
water that may not have drained from the chest.
During the cool spring months, fish can be kept for
several hours in the open air. The old-fashioned 
wicker creel is good for this. It allows air to
circulate, but does not expose the fish to the sun.
One thing I 
feel very strongly about is that any fish which is to
be kept in a boat or on shore should be killed 
immediately. It is degrading to the angler, to the
sport, and certainly to a fine game fish, to see it
flop 
about and die slowly. Every creature deserves a
dignified death.
Cleaning fish is one chore that no one really likes.
I do not either. But there is a right and a wrong way
to 
do it, and the right way is generally the fastest.
How a fish should be cleaned is determined partially
by 


--- Page 156 ---
how you want to cook it. Will the fish be fried,
broiled, or baked? The size of the fish also plays a
role. 
For example, the fish may be too small to fillet.
To clean small trout - skillet-sized trout - all you
need to do is to gut them, cut the gills out, wash
and 
dry them, and they are ready to cook.
Any fish that you intend to bake or broil whole can
be cleaned with a minimum of equipment - a big 
board, a sharp knife, and a scaling tool. Light
cotton gloves are also handy. Fish are easier to
grasp with 
a gloved hand, and the gloves prevent scratches from
spiny dorsal fins.
To clean a fish that is to be cooked whole, first
scale the fish briskly with a scaling tool. Do this
under 
running water to keep the scales from flying all over
your basement floor. But be sure to put a screen in 
the sink drain-hole to avoid plugging up the drain
with fish scales. With most fish, scaling from the
tail 
to the head goes fastest.
Cut out the vent or anus with a "V" Cut. Then hold
the fish belly down on the board and cut through the 
spine just behind the head.
Don't cut through the entrails of the fish. After
severing the spine. push and twist on the head with
one 
--- Page 85 ---
hand and pull on the body. The head will come loose
with all of the entrails attached. Cut off the fins 
and wash out the dressed fish. Now it is ready for
the pan.
Filleting a fish is also easy. For this you make your
first cut behind the gills - . slice down to the bone


--- Page 157 ---
and, without removing the blade,  begin slicing
straight along the backbone towards the tail. Keep 
cutting all the way to the tail. You will notice that
the fillet in the diagram has been cut away from the 
rest of the fish.
After slicing the fillet on to the tail, turn the
fish over and do the
same thing on the other side. When you have done
this, you have
cut away both fillets without disturbing the fish's
entrails. This is the
neatest and fastest way to prepare your fish.
To finish your fillets. you must remove the rib
section. Again, You
will    need a sharp and flexible knife to avoid
wasting meat. Insert the blade close to the rib bones
and 
slice the entire section away. This should be done
before the skin is removed to keep waste to a 
minimum. The skin can be removed from each fillet by
simply inserting the knife at the tail and cutting 
the meat from the skin. Start cutting a half inch
from the tail end of the skin, allowing a wedge for
the 
best grip. With a proper filleting knife, it is very
easy.
You now have each fillet ready for the pan or the
freezer. There is no waste. Remember not to overwash 
the fillets. You do not want to wash away the tasty
juices or take away from the fish's natural firm
state.
Cutting out the cheeks is the next step. Few
fishermen know that the checks are the filet mignon
of the 
fish. Although small, they are tasty and well worth
saving. Slice into the cheek where indicated, then 
scoop out the meat with the blade, peeling away the
skin. Repeat the same procedure on the other side. 
Many fishermen save these cheeks until they have
enough for a real gourmet's delight. After filleting 


--- Page 158 ---
you should wind up with the fish head, entrails,
spine, fins, and tail all intact. This is the neatest
way to 
prepare most fish, and once you have mastered it, it
is the easiest.
Catfish have to be skinned. With big catfish, start
by making a circular cut not much more than skin 
deep completely around the fish, just behind the
gills. Then make two more skin-deep cuts, one along 
the back to the tail and the other down the belly to
the tail. Take a corner of the skin on the back of
the 
fish with a pair of pliers and pull the skin
tailwards with one smooth motion. Now repeat this on
the 
other side. With a bit of practice, it goes very
quickly. With real whoppers you may have to use both 
hands on each side with a pair of pliers in each
hand, and you may find the skinning task easier if
the 
catfish is hung by its head.
Skinning and dressing small pan-sized catfish is
easy. You should start by placing your knife behind
the 
adipose fin (the small, fleshy fin on the back of the
back) and cutting the skin until your knife reaches 
the dorsal fin. Watch out for the backbone. Continue
to cut downwards behind the head, through the fish 
and right down to the spine, but not through it. Lay
the knife down and grasp the head in your right hand 
(if you are right-handed) and the body of the catfish
in your left hand. Bend the head down and break the 
--- Page 86 ---
backbone.
Then insert a finger of your left hand over the end
of the spine and into the rib cage and pull firmly. 
With your right hand, slowly pull the head toward the
tail. Do this smoothly and steadily. Do not jerk! 


--- Page 159 ---
The skin will peel smoothly, taking the guts, still
attached to the head, with it. Your catfish is now
ready 
for washing and the pan. This technique takes a bit
of practice, but it is the easiest way to clean
catfish 
that I know of.
There is no doubt that fresh fish are superior to
frozen fish. There is also no doubt that if care has
been 
taken to freeze the fish properly, frozen fish can be
exceptionally good. A fish that has been killed and 
cleaned immediately after being caught, has been kept
on ice, and has been frozen the same day, cannot 
be distinguished by the average person from a fresh
fish, as long as the fish has not been kept in the 
freezer for too long.
Fish, like all meat and vegetable products, should be
frozen as soon after harvesting as possible. It 
should also be frozen as quickly as possible. This is
best accomplished by placing fish, once they have 
been packaged, around the outside of the freezer near
the freezer coils and by not overloading the freezer 
with too much food to be frozen at one time. Most
freezers today are quite efficient, and can freeze 
solidly and very quickly one-and-a-half to two pounds
of product per cubic foot of freezer space.
Frozen fish should be stored between zero and twenty
degrees Fahrenheit to keep enzyme activity to a 
minimum. Of course fish must be adequately wrapped
for freezing to guard against moisture loss and 
discoloration commonly called "freezer burn". Pack
your fish in heavy plastic freezer bags or freezer 
wrap, carefully eliminating all air from the bag
before closing and tying it. Label your packages as
to 
what species of fish they contain, whether they are
whole fish or fillets, and the date they were frozen.
Fish can also be frozen in containers made of plastic
or glass. This is very handy for small fish or fish 


--- Page 160 ---
chunks. To freeze fish in containers, pack the
containers carefully to within one or one-and-a-half
inches 
of the top. It is important to leave an airspace at
the top for expansion once the liquid in the
container 
has frozen. Fill the space around and between the
fish with a chilled two-and-a-half percent brine 
solution. The fish must be covered with this
solution. Make sure there are no air bubbles in the
solution. 
Now secure the top of the container, making an
airtight seal. When the container is placed in the
freezer, 
the ice formed around the fish will keep the flesh
away from air and will prevent any loss of moisture. 
The only disadvantage of this method of storing fish
is that the containers take up a large amount of 
freezer space.
For maximum flavor, frozen fish in plastic bags or
freezer wrap should be used within two to three 
months. Fish frozen in container filled with brine
can be kept a little longer, up to six or nine months
The best way to defrost fish is slowly in your
refrigerator. Most fish take about twenty-four hours
to 
thaw. Thawing at room temperature is not a good idea.
If you need your fish in a hurry, defrost them by 
immersing them in cold water. Never refreeze fish.
TAKING CARE OF WILD MEAT
--- Page 87 ---
Every outdoorsman should know the basic procedures
for dressing and skinning game. It is one of the 
musts of wilderness survival. A number of factors
affect the taste and flavor of wild meat. For
example, 
some game' species are tastier than others. Also, the


--- Page 161 ---
taste of meat frequently depends on the physical 
condition of the animal, e.g. what it has been
feeding, and even on its age. For instance, a bull
moose 
shot during or shortly after the rut is generally in
poor condition. The fat that the bull put on during
the 
summer is gone burned up in chasing cows and fighting
other bulls. During the rut, mating, not feeding, 
gets preference in a bull's daily life. The animal is
thin and sinewy, consequently the meat will not be at
its best.
But basically the quality of wild meat depends on how
the animal was killed and how it was treated 
immediately after being shot. An animal that has been
wounded and then tracked and chased all over the 
backwoods has its system full of adrenalin and will
not be as good as the one that was killed when it was
completely relaxed Also, the faster the game cools
off after being shot, the better it taste. This is
true 
from mallards to moose.
DRESSING BIG GAME
Big game animals should be dressed immediately after
shooting. This means opening and emptying the 
body cavity, thus allowing the animal to cool
quickly. This is most easily accomplished by laying
the 
animal on its back with its head uphill if possible.
The animal may have to be anchored with rocks 
placed by its side or with its legs spread apart and
tied to trees. Be sure not to touch the musk glands
just 
below the hocks. They are marked by tufts of dark
hair. The glands give off an oil with an odor that
can 
taint your hands.
First, the anus and rectum are loosened by cutting in


--- Page 162 ---
the rump around them and they are firmly tied. A 
cut is then made in the skin and the abdominal wall
from the pelvic bone right up to the rib cage. Cut 
slowly, with the edge of the knife pointing upwards,
working the blade between two fingers which lift 
the skin and the abdominal wall away from the
internal organs as you cut. Make sure that you do not
puncture the intestines. Cut around the penis and
loosen it at this time.
Loosen the diaphragm, the wall of tissue separating
the stomach and intestines from the lungs and heart. 
This is done by cutting around the diaphragm close to
the ribs. In deer-sized animals, you can now reach 
up and grasp the windpipe and gullet. Cut these off
as high as possible with your other hand. In elk and 
moose-sized animals, you have to split the ribs with
an ax or a hatchet to be able to reach the windpipe 
and gullet. When the windpipe and gullet are cut
free, you can strip all the viscera and organs with a
strong backward pull on the gullet and windpipe. An
occasional cut with a knife will help to free the 
internal organs from the mesentery tissues as you
pull. When you come to the pelvis, finish loosening 
the rectum by cutting from the inside of the carcass
and pulling the anus through. Then drag the offal 
away from the carcass, keeping the heart and the
liver. This basic dressing technique works on all big
game animals.
The next step is to wipe up any spilled matter from
the intestines and blood from the inside of the 
--- Page 88 ---
carcass. A dry rag is best, but moss or leaves can be
used. If you have to wash something off with water, 
dry the cavity thoroughly afterwards. Meat that is
left wet for any length of time can spoil.


--- Page 163 ---
You must cut away the musk glands on the hind legs.
With a finger and a thumb, pinch and pull up the 
glands while sliding a sharp knife under them and
cutting right along the base. Throw the removed 
glands away and wash or wipe your hands and the knife
before touching any meat. Some hunters prefer 
to deal with the glands first, before even dressing
the animal. This is fine if you are near water and
can 
wash afterwards but, if YOU are not, it is better not
to take a chance on tainting your hands and the
knife.
In the very mild weather of early fall, it Is
frequently necessary to quarter a moose or elk
carcass in order 
to get it to cool quickly. A field-dressed moose or
elk (one with its internal organs removed) is a
massive 
animal. The meat on the animal's back is insulated by
the ground and can sour quickly. The best way to 
prevent this is to quarter the animal and hang it.
This is not always necessary in cold weather;
however, 
for the best possible meat it is a good idea to skin
and quarter every big game animal while it is still 
warm. Then place the meat in loose cheesecloth and
let it cool. Trim away the badly shot meat or it will
cause spoilage. 
Of course it is not always possible to skin out big
game after every hunt. However, all big game should 
be kept off the ground after fielddressing so that it
can cool quickly. With elk or moose, you have to 
prop the carcass up with logs and poles, or quarter
and hang it. Deer-sized animals are normally hung 
whole. The carcass should be left hanging for a
period of a few days up to as much as fourteen days
in a 
cool, breezy spot. Keep it away from the sun. The
length of the hanging period depends upon the 


--- Page 164 ---
temperature. If the temperature is above fifty
degrees, four or five days is fine. If the
temperature 
fluctuates between twenty and forty, two weeks is
excellent. Beef is best kept in a cold locker at
thirty-
five degrees for two weeks and ageing wild meat
properly is even more important than ageing beef for 
tenderness. Your meat is then ready for cutting and
wrapping for the freezer. You can let your local 
butcher do this. Deer, moose, and elk can be cut up
just like a steer. Trim away as much fat as possible 
because it is the fat that contains much of the gamy
flavor that many people find objectionable.
SKINNING BIG GAME
Skinning big game is not difficult. Generally the
legs are cut off below the knee and hock joints. The 
skin is then girdled and peeled away. The body is
skinned out very quickly. In the case of bears, the
cuts 
are made on the inside of the legs and the feet are
skinned out, keeping the claws on the foot if a rug
is to 
be made from the skin. This is also done in the case
of mountain goats where the hoofs are left attached 
to the skin. All skinning is much easier when the
carcass is still warm. Try to keep the hair away from
the meat. The hair of the pronghorn can taint the
meat a little.
The trickiest part of skinning big game is around the
head. This has to be done if the head is to be 
mounted. If you can have the head frozen or can get
the head to a taxidermist within a few days, leave it
for him to skin out. There is less chance of a
mistake or a wrong cut, but if you are going to be in
the 
bush for a couple of weeks, you must skin out the
head, particularly on bears, or the hair will start


--- Page 165 ---
to 
slip. Skin slowly and carefully, particularly around
the eyes and lips. Cut the ears off flush with the 
--- Page 89 ---
skull. Cut the entire snout off where the septum
between the nostrils meets the skull. Scrape all the
flesh 
away from the hide and salt the hide well, rubbing
the salt in.
EQUIPMENT
Besides a good knife and a honing stone, the big game
hunter may also need a hatchet or a light ax, a 
meat saw, cheesecloth meat bags, and ropes and
pulleys to dress his animals and take care, of the
meat. 
A light ax is needed for splitting the pelvis of a
moose or elk. A meat saw is best for getting through 
bones and for quartering big game, but the task can
also be done with a light ax. Meat bags are needed in
warm weather to protect the meat from flies. Ropes
and pulleys are needed to get a moose or elk off the 
ground and out of the woods. The type of game you
hunt dictates what type of equipment you need.
DRESSING SMALL GAME
Rabbits and squirrels are very easy to skin while
they are still warm. Squirrels, once they are cold,
are 
much harder. The easiest way is to behead the animal
and cut off its feet and tail. Then pinch the skin on
the back and cut through it, making the cut from the
root of the tail to the neck. Stick the fingers of
one 
hand around the carcass, inside the skin, and pull
the skin away with the other hand. It is as easy as 
pulling a glove off a hand. Small game can be field
dressed immediately after shooting with a technique 


--- Page 166 ---
similar to that for deer or you can wait until the
animal is skinned out to dress it.
GAME BIRDS
The diet of game birds influences their taste and
flavor. There is a big difference between a mallard
and 
a merganser, and between a mallard feeding on wheat
in a stubble field and a mallard in a marsh. But 
just like big game, the flavor of fowl depends upon
how the birds were treated after shooting. The worst 
thing for game birds is to put them into an air-
tight, rubberized game pocket in the back of a
hunting 
jacket, particularly on a warm day. The best place to
carry birds is in a game carrier on a belt or over
the 
shoulder, letting air circulate around them as much
as possible.
DRESSING GAME BIRDS
There is no doubt that field-dressing birds
immediately after they are retrieved is a good idea.
It hastens 
cooling and helps to keep fluids from the punctured
viscera out of the body cavity. Such game birds as 
sage grouse and spruce grouse should be dressed
immediately and their crops removed, for the best 
flavour. It is also a good idea to do this for the
species of ducks that eat a great deal of animal
matter. 
With other game birds, it is not as important, unless
they have been badly shot. However, it is still 
preferable to do it right away.
Field-dressing a game bird is easy. First, cut
yourself from a branch a bird-gutting hook about the
length 
and thickness of a pencil. The hook portion is made
from an off-running branch. Then cut a small slit by 
the vent and insert the hook into the bird's body
cavity. Twist it around three or four times and pull
out 


--- Page 167 ---
--- Page 90 ---
the entrails. Some European folding hunting knives
have a bird-gutting hook on them - a wonderful idea. 
The detailed cleaning is done later.
The field-dressing can be done more easily with your
hands. If you are near water, that is fine. It takes 
only a moment to wash your hands and continue the
hunt. Field-dressed birds can be left hanging in a 
cool, breezy place for several days without
deteriorating in flavor. Refrigeration is needed only
if the 
birds are to be kept a week or more in mild weather
before being eaten or frozen.
SKINNING GAME BIRDS
Some hunters prefer to skin their birds, mainly
because it is easier. However, to us purists,
skinning 
game birds such as quail, ruffed grouse, pheasants,
mallards, and canvasbacks is a bit of blasphemy. 
Skinning removes much of the fine flavor,
particularly if the birds are to be roasted. The
birds also dry 
out more when cooked. However, if the birds will be
cooked in a sauce or gravy, or coated first, they can
be skinned. Certainly such ducks as goldeneyes,
bluebills, and the sea ducks are better skinned.
Skinning 
removes some of the fat and the strong flavor with
it. Skinning game birds is very easy. Simply loosen 
the skin on the breast and start peeling. Skinning
ducks is another matter. You have to pull and cut.
PLUCKING GAME BIRDS
Plucking game birds is a more time consuming chore,
particularly if they have many pin feathers. Pluck 
the feathers out by taking "pinches" of them between
the thumb and the first two fingers and pull with 
the grain - the direction in which they lie - not


--- Page 168 ---
against the grain or you will tear the skin. Do not
take 
pinches that are too big or the skin will tear. All
game birds can be plucked dry. However, waterfowl, 
particularly if there are many of them, are much
easier to pluck after being scalded for about twenty 
seconds in 145 degree water. The best way to scald
the bird is to hold it by its head and dunk it into a
bucket of scalding water. Waterfowl will have on them
a hair-like fuzz. This is best removed by singeing 
with a candle. After plucking and dressing, the birds
must be washed carefully and dried. They are then 
ready for the oven or the freezer.
Most game that has been shot cleanly and quickly and
then properly handled after the shot will outclass 
anything you can buy in a supermarket. Game cooking
is an art. A game dinner, fully complemented 
with side trimmings and fine wines, can be a feast
indeed - a noble end to a good hunt.
Any outdoorsman may, at some time in his outdoor
adventures, land or bag a trophy fish or animal. The 
procedures to follow in such a case are beyond the
scope of this chapter on dealing with game and fish 
for the table. But there are many books on hunting
and fishing that do deal with this.
CHAPTER 18
THE ABC'S OF WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Skills for wilderness survival, like those for
administering first aid, are skills that every
outdoorsman 
--- Page 91 ---
hopes he will never have to use. But when they are
needed, they are indispensable. At the risk of 
sounding dramatic, they may spell the difference
between life and death. I can only cover the very
basic 
elements of wilderness survival in this chapter; the


--- Page 169 ---
subject is simply too broad and complex.
A knowledge of wilderness survival is essential for
anyone who loves to travel in the wilds - the
aircraft 
carrying you into a remote fishing lake may crash;
you may lose your compass and become lost; your 
canoe may overturn and all your gear may be lost. In
short, an emergency may develop at any time. I 
don't think it is necessary for every outdoorsman to
be a survival expert, but I do think that every 
outdoorsman should know the basics. Such skills, even
if they are never used in an actual emergency, 
are helpful in building confidence and self reliance
in the out-of-doors. A man who has confidence in his 
ability to survive in an emergency is unlikely to
succumb to fear, loneliness, or panic.
Many excellent books have been written on the subject
of wilderness survival, including one entitled 
Wilderness Survival by a good friend, Berndt
Berglund. Even home-study courses in wilderness
survival 
can be taken from National Survival Incorporated.
THE SEVEN DEADLY ENEMIES
To survive an emergency in the wilderness, you must
be in the proper frame of mind. Your attitude - 
your determination to survive, the instinct to live -
must be paramount. Fear, loneliness, pain, cold, 
fatigue, hunger, and thirst are the seven deadly
enemies you must guard against. Singly or in 
combination, they can rob you of your self confidence
or, even worse, of your desire to struggle for life.
Fear is nothing to be ashamed of. Only a fool is
never afraid. The point is to control your fear and
not let 
it get control of you. If the feeling of panic or
fear starts to creep up on you, think of positive
things - 
your ability as an outdoorsman, your skill in the
woods. A man on the verge of panic cannot think 
logically. He is prone to rash actions that may be


--- Page 170 ---
foolhardy and dangerous.
Loneliness is a second cousin to fear. They
frequently travel together. The worst thing about
loneliness 
is that it strikes without warning. Suddenly you
realize that you are alone. This will gnaw at you, 
lowering your resistance and vitality. If you feel
loneliness coming on, keep busy - sing, whistle to 
yourself, go out and gather food, do anything to keep
your mind off the fact that you are alone.
Pain is nature's signal that something is wrong. In
moments of excitement, you may not feel pain. But 
when things calm down a bit, pain surfaces. Tend to
your wounds, but do not let pain get the best of you.
It can weaken the desire to go on.
Cold can be a severe threat to survival. It numbs the
spirit as well as the body. If you are out in the 
winter months, plan your shelter and fire in such a
way as to minimize the effects of cold temperatures. 
A person freezes to death only when he is overly
tired and sleepy; otherwise the cold will not let him
fall 
asleep.
Fatigue reduces mental ability. It can make you
thoughtless and uncaring. Fatigue is not always the 
--- Page 92 ---
result of overwork or overexertion. Many times it is
the result of a mental attitude - frustration, 
hopelessness, or lack of a plan. Do not exert
yourself, but keep making plans as to how to survive
the 
crisis.
Hunger makes all of us more susceptible to cold,
pain, and fear. A man with a full belly rarely loses
his 
optimism. Conserve your food and, if you get a
chance, add fish, game, and edible plants to your


--- Page 171 ---
larder.
Thirst can be maddening. It can dull the mind and
promote panic. A man can survive a week or longer 
without food, but not without water. In dry country,
do not leave a water source. Beware of dehydration 
even when there is plenty of water around you.
TO STAY OR TO WALK OUT
Whether to stay and camp, or to attempt to walk out,
is the first decision for you to make. If you are
lost, 
you should stay. You do not know where to go anyway.
That is why you are lost. Make camp near an 
opening or a lake where a searching aircraft will
have a better chance of spotting you.
On the other hand, if you have been forced into a
survival situation because of an airplane crash or a 
canoe overturning, you could attempt to walk out if
you have a map and a compass and are not more 
than a few days from a road, a railway, or a human
habitation. Otherwise you should stay. Do not risk 
getting lost. Searchers are more likely to find you
if you are near an aircraft.
The first rule in a wilderness emergency is to keep
your clothing and equipment in good repair. Your 
personal survival kit should contain a couple of
needles and some strong thread. Mend any rips in your
clothing. Sew on any buttons that may have come
loose. Heated resin from evergreens makes good glue. 
Strips of green deer or moose hide make good
bindings. As the hide dries, it will shrink and pull
tighter. 
There is a way of repairing most clothing and tools
in the wilderness axes, knives, gunstocks, punctures 
in canoes, and so on - by using a bit of ingenuity.
SHELTERS
The first thing you must build is a shelter. What
kind of shelter will depend on the materials at hand,
including what material you may have with you. A


--- Page 172 ---
shelter can be made from evergreen branches, 
bullrushes and reeds, sod, bark, slabs of rocks, or
even snow blocks. Canvas or plastic sheeting are 
excellent.
A lean-to structure is the easiest to build. It
should have at least a forty-five degree slope to its
roof to 
shed rain. Roots or strips of bark or animal hide can
be used as lashings. Do not make your shelter larger 
than necessary to hold you and your gear. The larger
the shelter, the harder it will be to keep it warm.
In 
cold weather, do not neglect to insulate the floor
with evergreen boughs or, even better. with dry grass
or 
rushes. Loose snow is an excellent insulating
material for sides and roofs.
Do not neglect natural shelters such as caves, if
they are not damp or occupied by bears. Spruce trees 
--- Page 93 ---
with branches to the ground can also make good snug
shelters in winter. However, more branches may 
be needed to reinforce them. The only disadvantage
with such shelters, is that no fire can be built
inside, 
lest it melt the snow. Snow houses are also potential
shelters in the far north during winter, but a snow 
saw-knife is needed to build one. Only a downed
aircraft would carry such an implement.
Shelters should be located in places that protect
them from wind.
Summer may be the only exception to this because of
insects. In summer, windswept areas have fewer 
blackflies and mosquitos. Remember, southern
exposures are always warmer.
FIRE
Once a shelter has been built, a fire is an important
consideration. To warm the shelter, build the fire as


--- Page 173 ---
close to the opening of the shelter as safety will
allow. Construct a log reflector behind the fire to
reflect 
heat towards the shelter. If possible, use only dead,
standing trees for firewood. These will be drier and 
will give better heat. Dead trees on the ground tend
to be wet and burn poorly.
Make sure that you build a good fireplace of rocks or
mineral soil so that your fire will not accidentally 
spread. A forest fire might leave you in an even
worse predicament. In winter, do not build your fire 
near evergreen trees laden with snow. The heat may
cause the snow to slide down. Shelter the fire from 
wind or build your fireplace on the lee side. Do not
use rocks that might explode - limestone in 
particular - around a fire. Watch out for sparks and
flying embers. They could burn holes in your 
clothing or sleeping bag.
Obviously anyone venturing into the bush, even if he
is planning to stay on the fringes, should carry an 
ample supply of strike-anywhere matches in a
waterproof container. In fact, I always carry two 
containers - the second one holding special wind-
resistant and water-resistant matches. A cigarette 
lighter is also a good bet as long as the fuel lasts.
I would not advise anyone going into the bush with 
only a lighter. A flint and steel should be a part of
every personal survival kit.
Save your matches! This is one of the axioms of
survival. Use tinder such as dry moss, grass, dry 
shredded cedar bark, or dry birch bark to start a
fire. Have plenty of it on hand. If tinder is not
handy, 
make feather sticks of dry soft wood for lighting
fires. If you have a steel and flint in your survival
kit, 
use it instead of matches. At night, bank your fire
so that you can start a new one from the hot embers
in 


--- Page 174 ---
the morning. This is an old Indian trick - it saves
matches.
In an emergency, ammunition can be used to start a
fire. How? It's easy. Simply remove the bullet or 
shot and wad from a round, and pour half the powder
into a bed of tinder. Then place a bit of cotton,
soft 
cloth, or dry moss or lichens into the round as
wadding. Fire the gun in the air. The wadding should 
burst into flames and can then be placed on the
tinder.
On sunny days, convex lenses such as magnifying
glasses, miner's lenses, or lenses from cameras,
rifle 
'scopes, or binoculars can be use to start a fire by
focusing the lens with a hot pinpoint on tinder. Film
is 
--- Page 94 ---
also very highly flammable and a lens will ignite it
almost immediately. A battery from a downed 
aircraft or wrecked power boat can produce an
electric arc, and a gasoline-dampened rag or tinder
will 
ignite instantly. But do not try this near the
aircraft.
SIGNALS
There are a large number of signals that a lost
person can use. Priority should be given to smoke
signals. 
You may be in a wilderness area, but perhaps not so
deep that a forest-fire tower or a firepatrol
aircraft 
cannot be able to spot you.
In a clearing, build three signal fires at least a
hundred feet apart in a triangle. If this is not
feasible 
because you are in thick bush, build three fires in a
line or on a lakeshore or riverbank. These should be 


--- Page 175 ---
built near your shelter so that you can light them
quickly if you hear an aircraft overhead. Build these
fires from dry wood, but additional fuel should be
green branches, moss, grass, or leaves anything that 
will smoke heavily. Rubber and oil from aircraft make
lots of black smoke. Do not try to keep the fires 
burning all the time or you will waste too much
energy feeding them. But have the fires ready to
start at 
a moment's notice. Keep the wood dry in case of bad
weather by covering it with evergreen boughs. 
These can be burned later to create smoke.
Light signals are also effective. The best one is a
"torch tree". It is visible for many miles. To do
this, 
select a lone-standing evergreen with thick foliage.
Dry, highly flammable material such as bark, 
kindling wood, or moss among the lower branches is
necessary. Then build a big bonfire around the 
trunk of the tree at the base. As the bonfire flares
up, it will ignite the tinder in the branches and
start the 
entire tree burning like a huge torch.
Again, you should have the torch tree prepared ahead
of time so that when you hear an aircraft you will 
be ready to signal. A torch tree can be started in
the winter by knocking off all the snow and ice from
the 
tree. If you start a couple of smaller fires near
your intended torch tree, the heat from them will
knock 
the snow off and help to dry the torch tree off.
Torch trees throw sparks. So exhibit caution and
vigilance 
against possible forest fires.
Gasoline and oil from a downed aircraft can be used
to start big flash fire when a search aircraft is
used. 
A bed of grass or soml~ cloth can be used for this


--- Page 176 ---
gasolineoil fire.
Three of anything - three shots, three whistle
blasts, three flashes of a signal mirror - is the
international 
distress code. This is the code you should use when
signalling to searchers.
GROUND-TO-AIR SIGNALS
After you have prepared your smoke signals and torch
tree, build some ground-to-air signals. These can 
be constructed from evergreen branches on snow or on
a sandy beach. Peeled logs or white birch logs 
are good on a dark background. Sand, large rocks, and
stones can also be used. The more contrast you 
can create between the signals and their background,
the more easily they will be seen. Size is also 
--- Page 95 ---
important. They must be fifty feet long and longer if
possible.
Be sure the terrain is reasonably safe for aircraft
to land - that the lake is deep enough with no
boulders, 
that there are no hidden rocks on the tundra, and
that the terrain will support a light aircraft. If an
aircraft 
cannot land, you may have to walk out.
FOOD AND WATER
A man with a full belly can withstand hardships that
a starving man could never endure. Water is 
generally a problem only in dry country. A man lost
in the deserts of the southwest or northern Mexico 
will be in serious trouble if he doesn't find water.
It is impossible for an uninjured, knowledgeable, and
skilled outdoorsman to die of hunger in the 
temperate regions of this continent during the
spring, summer, or autumn months. There is just too
much 
food around. Even in winter, there is still plenty of
food, but harvesting it is more difficult. Food is


--- Page 177 ---
likely 
to be a more serious problem in the Arctic. But even
here, a man with a rifle can survive.
The subject of food gathering - hunting, snaring,
trapping, fishing, and harvesting edible plants and
fruits 
- is so vast that I can only touch upon it in this
chapter. However, I must state that there are very
few 
creatures on this continent that a man should not
eat, and certainly no fresh-water fish that are
harmful.
If you ever become lost or stranded in the
wilderness, immediately conserve any emergency
rations you 
may have. If you can add to your food supply by
harvesting any animals, fish, or edible plants, do
so, 
even if you expect to be found or rescued the next
day. Having an ample supply of food will give you 
confidence even if you are not rescued when expected.
There is something about having a supply of 
food that is comforting to the human mind - a sort of
hoarding instinct.
For example, I know a man who once got lost on a
moose hunt. He was worried. From a high ridge he 
spotted a fairly large lake and decided that that was
where he should stay while waiting to be found. On 
his way to the lake, he encountered a moose, which he
promptly shot. After he dressed the moose and 
skinned it, keeping the hide intact to use as a
blanket, he built a small lean-to against an
overgrown tree 
near the shoreline of the lake. He built three smoke
fires and waited. The second day after he was lost, 
he heard an aircraft. The aircraft spotted his smoke
fires, landed on the lake, and rescued him. It even 
hauled out his quartered moose. The man was at no
time worried about not surviving. He knew that he 
had enough food for a long time and this gave him the


--- Page 178 ---
confidence he needed to settle down and wait to 
be rescued.
EDIBLE PLANTS
Green plants such a spruce tips, willow tips, leaves
of Labrador tea, dandelion leaves, and many others 
are a good source of vitamin C. The best way to
ingest this is to drink tea made from such leaves.
Rose 
hips, the fruits of the wild rose, also have a high
vitamin C content. Another good source of vitamin C
is 
the cambium, the inner layer between the bark and the
wood of poplar, jack pine, and spruce.
--- Page 96 ---
The flowers of many wild plants in North America are
safe to eat. The roots of cattail, wild carrot, tiger
lily, lady's slipper, arrowhead plant, vetch, and
other plants with thick fibrous roots are good
sources of 
carbohydrates. They can be eaten raw or boiled. The
roots of the water lily are edible when boiled twice 
or even three times, but the water should be changed
between boilings to remove the acrid flavor.
Greens such as dandelion leaves, young green milkweed
pods, young waterlily seed pods, the lower 
inner core of young cattails, and young pigweed can
all be eaten raw or stewed. Fiddleheads, the fronds 
of ferns, are delicious.
Berries are another source of food. Almost everyone
knows the common ones such as blueberries, 
raspberries, blackberries, cranberries, and
wintergreen. But be careful with others unless you
can 
positively identify them. Red and white berries are
more prone to be poisonous than not, unless you 
know them. Avoid any black or bluecolored berries in
bunches. If you come across berries you don't 


--- Page 179 ---
know and want to try them, eat only a few and wait
twenty-four hours for a reaction. Then eat a little 
more and wait again. If, after the second twenty-
four-hour period, nothing unpleasant has occurred,
the 
berries are probably safe. Other fruits such as wild
cherries, acorns, and nuts of all kinds are safe to
eat.
Among the lower plants, lichens can be eaten. Scrape
these off rocks and stumps. They can be eaten 
boiled, dried, or dried and powdered, and used in
stews and soups. The lemon lichen is edible and very 
common. Mushrooms should be eaten only by those who
know them. Although only a few are 
poisonous, these can be deadly. Generally speaking,
anything that birds and animals eat is likely to be 
safe for you to eat, but always make the sample-and-
wait test before eating something new or unknown. 
Two very poisonous plants are the baneberry with its
cluster of red and white berries and the water 
hemlock whose purplestreaked leaves have a foul odor
when crushed. There are no poisonous plants 
above the tree line in the Arctic.
The water hemlock is one of the relatively few
poisonous plants in the outdoors. Other deadly plants
include some of the mushrooms and the baneberry.
WILDLIFE
Aside from some of the insects, particularly
caterpillars, you can eat just about anything in the
way of 
animal life. Large earthworms, snails, grasshoppers,
and crickets are all edible. Grasshoppers or locusts 
have a nutty flavor when roasted, and are considered
a delicacy in the Middle East. Frogs, lizards, and 
snakes (even the poisonous ones) can also be eaten.
Indeed, snakes are reputed to be quite tasty.
However, mammals, birds, and fish are generally more
important to a man trying to survive, if for no 
other reason than because they are larger and more


--- Page 180 ---
abundant. While plant materials and some of the 
invertebrate animals can be gathered with the bare
hands, this is not the case for fish, birds, and 
mammals. You will have to have or make traps, snares,
or weapons. Snares and traps are the most 
effective way of taking small mammals and birds.
Rabbits can be easily taken by snares of different 
types. The snares should be set on known rabbit runs.
These are easy to find in thick cover or when 
--- Page 97 ---
snow is on the ground. Squirrels can also be taken on
snares set on leaning poles against trees. It is wise
to set two or three snares in succession, because
often squirrels travel in pairs.
Big game such as deer can also be snared. There are
essentially two types of snares for this. One is the 
Apache foot snare which snares the animal's foot and
is anchored to a log which the animal must drag. 
The other is a neck or head snare set about eighteen
inches off the ground. The noose must be about 
twenty-four inches in diameter. This snare is also
anchored to a log or a very strong whippy sapling. 
These snares must be set on known deer trails.
Snares can be made of almost any kind of rope or
wire. Certainly wire snares are superior to anything 
else because they are thin, difficult to see, and
easy to bend into position. For big game, the snare
has to 
be very strong because a snared animal will exert a
great deal of force in its frenzy to get away. Snares
for small game can be made from strips of deer skin
or moose hide, strong string, or heavy fishing line.
I 
have even used boot laces. Most small game snares are
lethal. They kill the animal almost instantly. 
Every survival kit should contain a coil or two of


--- Page 181 ---
snare wire.
Fur-bearing animals such as foxes can be taken with a
stone beehive trap baited with fish. Dead-fall 
traps can also be used. Birds can be caught in the
Ojibway bird snare. The Canada jay or whiskeyjack is 
particularly vulnerable. Gulls can be caught on
baited fish hooks. Grouse - ruffed, blue, and spruce
- can 
frequently be caught on a noose on a pole. Indeed,
often grouse can be killed with rocks. In the 
wilderness, these birds are usually very trusting.
The eggs and young of birds are very nutritious.
Nests 
of ground-nesting birds are easy to find on the
Arctic islands. Geese can be killed with clubs during
their 
flightless stage of moult.
Generally mammals cannot be taken without a weapon. A
club is the easiest weapon to make. A club is 
all a man needs for a porcupine. A rap on the head
will kill this spiny animal instantly. A porcupine 
should be skinned from its bare belly. If you see
porcupine damage on the branches of trees, watch 
carefully. You will probably encounter more
porcupines in trees, and they are easily shaken down.
The only other mammals that can be killed with a club
are lemmings and mice. Lemmings in particular 
may be a very important source of survival food in
the Arctic regions. Such aquatic mammals as beavers 
and muskrats are also easily killed with a club, if
you can catch them on shore. If you see beaver 
activity, watch carefully. Sit down and wait. Perhaps
you can catch one by cutting off its escape route 
once it goes on land.
Other simple weapons are: throwing sticks for birds
and small mammals, a catapult made from any 
rubber or elastic in an aircraft, or even a bow and
arrow. But usually these weapons are not very 
effective and practice is needed with them to achieve
a fair degree of proficiency.


--- Page 182 ---
A firearm is invaluable for survival. Normally
aircraft flying over wilderness areas carry guns in
their 
survival kits. In hunting for survival, one must
forget any sort of sporting ethic. Your ability to
survive 
depends on your skill as a hunter. The man who knows
intimately the habits and habitat requirements of 
wildlife is bound to be more successful as a hunter.
The basic rules of hunting are: move quietly and 
--- Page 98 ---
slowly; look a lot; move upwind or cross wind; watch
for game signs such as well-worn game trails, 
tracks, droppings, feeding activities, dens, holes,
and salt licks. In dry country, water holes are good 
places to wait downwind.
Remember that any bird or mammal can be eaten - even
such fur-bearing animals as mink, martens, 
fishers, foxes and wolves. The various ground
squirrels, marmots, and woodchucks are all edible.
Such 
animals as otters, lynx, bobcat, and cougar have a
reputation of being very tasty. Owls are said to be 
indistinguishable from grouse in a stew pot.
Remember not to waste ammunition. Kill the biggest
animal you can find. Deer, elk, moose, and bears 
are all very good to eat. So are seal, caribou,
muskox, and polar bear in the Arctic regions. Any
sort of 
firearm is better than none. In an emergency, game
can be killed with a shotgun loaded with bird shot if
the hunter can get close enough. Big game can also be
killed with a small-bore rifle such as the 
common .22 rimfire. However, center-fire rifles of
.30 caliber are the best choice for big game animals,
while a twelve-gauge shotgun is the most efficient


--- Page 183 ---
type of firearm for small game.
A Mauser-type bolt-action rifle is an excellent
choice for an aircraft and for wilderness expeditions
because of its simplicity, ruggedness, and
dependability. The well-known .30, 06 caliber is
probably the 
wisest choice. A double-barrelled shotgun with two
triggers is the best type of shotgun. It is rugged
and 
simple, it can be dismantled readily to fit into a
small place and, above all, it is really two guns in
one. 
Should the firing pin break on one barrel, the other
barrel can still be used. Also, one barrel of such a 
gun can be loaded with bird shot for small game while
the other barrel can be loaded with rifle slugs or 
buckshot for big game. The hunter is then prepared
for any type of game he may encounter.
Another excellent survival firearm is the combination
over-and-under. With such a gun one barrel is a 
rifle barrel and the other is a shotgun. The
combination over-and-unders are made in many
different rifle 
calibers and shotgun gauges in Europe, including .30,
06 and twelve gauge. Unfortunately these guns are 
very expensive, $500 or more. However, there is a
suitable over-and-under made in the United States - 
the Savage Model 24V. This is available in .30-30 and
twenty gauge, three-inch magnum barrels. The 
twenty-gauge magnum comes close to being as effective
as a twelve gauge. The .30-30 cartridge is not 
as good as the .30, 06 for very big game such as
moose and elk, but it is ample if a hunter gets close
enough and places his shot well. The advantage of an
over-and-under is that one firearm is both a rifle 
and a shotgun. The Savage Model 24V is a simple,
rugged gun, and at the same time it is short and
light. 


--- Page 184 ---
It can be taken down for storage. Its current list
price is a little less than $100.
Fish can be an important source of food. During
spawning runs in the spring or fall, many species of
fish 
- pike, trout, char, salmon, and suckers - are
particularly vulnerable. Dams of various kinds can be
constructed in the shallows to trip or contain the
fish. They are also more vulnerable to spearing and 
snagging at this time. A surprisingly efficient fish
spear can be made from a tri-fork of a green hardwood
limb that has been baked in a fire to harden. The
points should be sharp and, if possible, have barbs.
Of course fish can also be caught on hooks and line.
Certainly every personal survival kit should have 
strong line, hooks of various sizes, and some
artificial lures such as spoons and spinners. Hooks
can also 
--- Page 99 ---
be fashioned from nails, pins, animal bones, and
shells. Metal can be heated in a fire and crude hooks
pounded and bent with stones.
Lures can be fashioned from shiny metal. The bowl of
a soup spoon makes a very fine fishing spoon 
once a hook is attached. Brightly colored bits of
cloth and bits of aluminum foil can also be used as 
lures. Meat of any kind, particularly the less edible
parts of fish, and, of course, large insects, frogs, 
crawfish, and earthworms all make suitable bait.
An aircraft should carry a good length of fishing net
- nylon gillnet being best - fully equipped with 
sinkers and floats. Fishing with a net is far more
effective than fishing with a hook and line. Once the
net 
is set, it works continuously. A net can be set just


--- Page 185 ---
about anywhere, including under the ice, by being 
passed from one hole to another with notched sticks.
The places to set a net are near steep drop-offs, 
entrances of weedy bays, stream mouths, and pools
below rapids - in short, the kind of places that fish
frequent.
COOKING AND PRESERVING MEAT
My first piece of advice is not to waste anything.
Almost every part of an animal can be eaten except
the 
bones and hair. Aside from such internal organs as
the liver, heart, and kidneys, other parts such as
the 
lungs, stomach, intestines, and brain can all be
eaten. (Only the liver from the polar bear is
poisonous 
because of its high vitamin A content.) The long
bones of legs can be cracked open for their
nourishing 
marrow. Do not waste any fat, even if you cannot eat
it now. You may need it later to eat with lean meat 
such as rabbits. Fat may also be used to make leather
boots waterproof and to soften dry skins.
Do not waste any skins or hides. When you skin an
animal, do it in such a way that the skin remains 
intact. The skins can be used for blankets,
coverings, clothing, or for making into rope.
Game and fish can be cooked in a number of ways. If
you have a large survival kit from an aircraft, no 
doubt it will contain cooking utensils. The task of
cooking is much easier then. But game and fish can be
cooked over an open fire by broiling it on a green
stick over the coals and flames. This is probably the
best way to cook small game, birds, and fish. Chunks
of moose or caribou meat or chunks of a big fish 
can also be cooked in this way.
Strips of meat can also be cooked directly on coals


--- Page 186 ---
or on any sheets of metal placed on the coals. Fish 
can be split open and attached to a slab of a log and
cooked that way. Both fish and meat can be baked in 
hot coals by coating the fish or meat in clay. The
scales or skin should be left attached to the fish.
Do not 
eat any fish raw because of parasites, but deer,
moose, and caribou can certainly be eaten rare like
beef. 
However, bear meat should be cooked well like pork
and for the same reason - it can cause trichinosis 
when eaten raw.
Meat and fish can be preserved in a number of ways.
Freezing is the simplest. But they can also be cut 
into thin strips and fillets and dried in the sun and
wind or over a smoky fire. Large chunks of meat can 
be preserved in coolish weather simply by hanging
them in a cool, dry, and breezy spot and letting a 
--- Page 100 ---
hard crust or rind form around them. This rind is cut
away when the meat is eaten. Moisture is the big 
culprit behind meat spoilage. If a mold forms on the
outside of moist meat, cut or scrape the mold away 
and eat the meat. The mold is just a fungus. In warm
weather cooked meat of any sort keeps better than 
raw meat.
Smoking is a very effective way of preserving meat. A
simple smoke house can be built on a steep bank. 
Just dig a trench up the bank and cover it with
branches and sod. The fireplace is at the bottom of
the 
trench. A shelter or smoke chamber is constructed in
the form of a tepee at the top using bark, skins, 
canvas, or sticks covered with sod. The smoke will
travel up the trench into the smoke chamber.
Hardwoods are the best bet as far as woods used for
smoking are concerned. If possible, avoid 
evergreens which, due to their gums and resins, have


--- Page 187 ---
a tendency to give the meat an off-flavor. In the 
Arctic, permafrost provides good cold storage. Dig a
hole until you hit it. Put your meat in, preferably 
wrapped in something, and bury it.
Surplus food should be stored or cached so that it is
safe from would-be robbers - mice, birds, and bears. 
Hanging meat ten to fifteen feet off the ground will
protect it from bears but, unless it is covered, 
Canada jays and even ravens will get at it. Evergreen
branches can be hung around it to ward off at least 
some birds.
SURVIVAL KITS
Throughout this chapter I have frequently referred to
survival kits. I do not think anyone should go on a 
wilderness trip, even for a day, without some
essential pieces of survival equipment. Ideally this 
equipment should be contained in a canvas or leather
pouch. The personal survival kit must be light 
enough and small enough to fit into the pocket of a
jacket or on a belt.
It should contain a small folding knife, a small
compass, a signalling mirror, a whistle for
signalling, 
fishing line, hooks, three or four lures, snare wire,
a waterproof container of strike-anywhere matches, a 
flint and steel for starting fires, a container of
waterproof and wind-resistant matches, two cubes of 
chemical fire starter in case no dry tinder can be
found, needles and strong thread, and a couple of
sticks 
of freeze-dried meat or salami. Besides this the
outdoorsman should carry on his person a good knife 
plus a fairly sophisticated compass and a small
pocket stone in a leather sheath for touching up the 
knife's edge.
A survival kit for an aircraft should contain a
personal kit along the lines mentioned above, plus a 
firearm and ammunition, an ax, a folding shovel,
emergency rations (canned or freeze-dried), cooking 
utensils, tough plastic sheeting or a piece of canvas


--- Page 188 ---
for shelter. All this should be in a kit bag or
duffel 
bag. The aircraft should also carry sleeping bags
plus a small tent.
FILE A FLIGHT PLAN
Just as aircraft file flight plans on where they are
going, so should you. No one should ever venture into
--- Page 101 ---
the wilderness without telling someone, preferably
two or more people, where they are going and when 
they will be back.
If you are hiking, hunting, or fishing in the
wilderness out of the main camp, tell your partners
in which 
direction you are going. Arrange a signal - three
shots or a signal flare fired from a rifle for a
specific 
hour at night if one of you fails to return by
nightfall. If you are going on a wilderness canoe
trip, tell the 
forest ranger or local game warden when you expect to
be back, with instructions that if you are two 
days late to organize a search.
If you are camped alone somewhere and are going out
for a day's hike, leave a note at your campsite 
telling where you are going and when you expect to be
back. If you have driven to a spot to fish or hike 
for a day, leave a note on your car windshield.
CHAPTER 19
THE OUTDOORSMAN'S FIRST-AID KIT
The old Boy Scout motto - Be Prepared - may sound
like a corny cliche but its meaning is still very 
applicable to every outdoorsman. No one should go on
a canoe trip, a fishing trip, or a camping trip 
without an adequate first-aid kit and, of course,
some knowledge of first aid.
There are many first-aid kits on the market for use


--- Page 189 ---
in an automobile. Some are simply junk, but others 
are well conceived and equipped. The better kits are
ideal for an automobile camping trip, but they are 
too bulky and heavy for the backpacker, the canoe
tripper, the hiker, or even the hunter or fisherman 
going on a fly-in or horseback trip.
Here is a plan for a first-aid kit that is light
enough and small enough to be packed along on any 
wilderness trip, yet it can be used to treat
everything from a fairly serious cut to dysentery.
This kit was 
designed by E. Russell Kodet, M.D., and was described
in Outdoor Life magazine some years ago. I 
have assembled one of these kits and have found it to
be extremely useful. Some of the contents have yet 
to be used, but a day may come when they will be
needed.
There is no substitute for immediate medical
attention when a serious injury has occurred. But on 
wilderness trips, medical attention is generally
hours, if not days, away. And even on outings near 
hospitals and doctors, immediate first aid can
minimize discomfort and pain and even prevent death.
Now for the kit. The only liquid that this kit
contains is eyedrops. Liquids are heavy and they
frequently 
spill. There is also no alcohol or antiseptic in this
kit. Although many first-aid books, particularly the 
older ones, recommend that cuts and scratches be
doused liberally with alcohol or antiseptics to kill 
germs, these materials also kill living tissue. Germs
grow best in dead or devitalized tissue, and
certainly 
devitalized tissue heals more slowly than healthy
tissue.
The best way to treat cuts and scratches is to wash
them with soap and water and dress them. If the 
wound is oozing, a plastic-like absorbent tissue such
as Telfa should be placed over the wound first to 


--- Page 190 ---
--- Page 102 ---
prevent sticking. Then the wound should be dressed.
The gauze recommended for this kit is the Kling 
type. This gauze adheres to itself, thereby making it
easier to use. A gaping wound should be brought 
together with a "butterfly" plastic tape. In areas
where there is a fair amount of movement, a butterfly
may not do the job. A suture may be needed. No one
should attempt sutures - even if he knows how if 
the victim can be taken to a doctor. But if a doctor
is days away, there may be no other choice. Making a 
stitch or suture is not difficult. Since the wound is
generally painful already and the nerves lying close
to 
the skin are frequently severed by the cut, the
needle causes less pain than one might suspect. No
pain 
killers such as Novocaine are used, because syringes
and needles require special precautions that just 
don't fit into the scheme of a first-aid kit such as
this.
Suturing packages can be bought with the needle
already attached to the suture material. They come in
different thicknesses, but 3-0 is suitable for
everything except the face. The cut should be washed
and 
dried, and then stitched. The needle is held in a
hemostat, a sort of small, medical, needle-nosed
plier 
that locks. The hemostat has other uses in the
wilderness as well, such as removing thorns and
slivers.
Stitches should always be taken only through the
skin, never deeper. After the knot is tied the ends
are 
left one-quarter inch long to make removal (after
about seven days) easier. No suturing should ever be 


--- Page 191 ---
attempted near the eyes by a layman. The one
advantage of suturing is that it usually stops the
bleeding 
very quickly, and this makes the injured person feel
much more at ease.
Eyedrops that will act as a local anesthetic and
treat inflammation or infection can be very useful on
a 
wilderness trip. An outdoorsman's eyes are very
susceptible to injury. A branch can whip back and hit
him in the face; wood chips from chopping wood
present a hazard; cinders from a campfire are 
hazardous; and snow blindness can occur from
participation in winter sports such as snowshoeing.
ski 
touring, snowmobiling, ice fishing, or hunting in
winter. In high altitudes, one can get conjunctivitis
which has symptoms like snow blindness. One good
eyedrop remedy is a mixture of equal parts of 
Pontocaine and Neohydeltrasol. A drop every two or
three hours is the recommended dosage. The 
treated eye will lose its ability to blink. which
protects and cleanses it from dust, so cover it with
a clean 
handkerchief or at least stay out of windy places.
This will wear off in approximately two hours.
Hikers, backpackers, and hunters going into the
mountains frequently get headaches due to the high 
altitude, but after the first day or two they usually
adjust to the thinner air. Aspirin can be taken for 
headache relief, but often it is not enough. An
Empirin compound is more effective. This can also be 
used to relieve pain due to sunburn, poison-ivy rash,
or sprains. It has no effect on pain stemming from 
internal organs.
Nausea and intestinal cramps can be treated with
Tridol or Campazinc. The dosage rates vary depending 
on the weight of the tablets; a dozen tablets should


--- Page 192 ---
be ample. If continuous vomiting occurs, get medical 
help fast. It could be something serious.
For severe infections, blood poisoning, and
pneumonia, strong antibiotics are needed. The kit
should 
contain penicillin or Achromycin. Ten tablets should
be ample. But you must be careful with penicillin. 
Some persons are allergic to it, and treating someone
with penicillin who does not know whether or not 
--- Page 103 ---
he is allergic can be hazardous.
Diarrhoea can also be a problem, particularly when
traveling in the wilderness of Africa or South 
America. Tainted foods or water are frequent causes
of this. Lomotil tablets give relief. Eighteen
tablets 
should be ample for any emergency. Sulfasuxidine is
also good for sterilizing the intestines. The kit 
should include some tablets for relief of
constipation, which can be caused by a change in
diet.
If you have any recurring health problems, the kit
should contain necessary medication to treat it. This
should be spare. medication in excess of what you
will need.
Many of the drugs I have suggested can be obtained
only with a doctor's prescription, so consult with 
your family physician. Most family doctors will give
you the necessary prescriptions once they know 
what these drugs are to be used for. It is not a bad
idea to consult him about the contents of your first-
aid 
kit. He may have valuable suggestions. Some doctors
may have trepidations about some of the 
treatments (for example, the suturing), but when they
realize that you would stitch a victim only when 
you are four days of hard paddling away from medical


--- Page 193 ---
help, they will see the point.
The kit I have suggested costs about twenty dollars
to assemble. It weighs no more than six ounces 
including the pouch that it is kept in. If you make
substitutions in the kit, keep weight and bulk in
mind.
The following is a list of the proposed contents of a
first-aid kit:
Band Aids gauze flats Kling roller bandage
butterflies tape
suture packages hemostat scalpel blades (or small
scissors) nausea and cramp tablets dysentery and
anti-
constipation tablets antibiotics Empirin compound
eyedrops
CHAPTER 20
FIRST AID IN THE OUTDOORS
Everyone should know a bit of first aid, but such
knowledge is even more essential for an outdoorsman 
who frequently is far from a hospital or doctor.
Knowing what to do when a calamity strikes could ease
pain or suffering, and even prevent death.
The basic techniques for first aid are simple. There
is no reason for not knowing them. With a little 
knowledge of first aid and a firstaid kit such as the
one described in the previous chapter, you can handle
most minor mishaps.
GENERAL RULES
Whether treating a victim of an accident or illness,
there are several basic rules you must follow in 
administering first aid. They are:
--- Page 104 ---
1. Remain calm. Carry out your first-aid tasks
quickly, quietly, and with an absolute minimum of
fuss 
and panic.


--- Page 194 ---
2. Check the breathing of the victim. Give artificial
respiration if breathing has stopped. With this 
procedure, every second counts.
3. Check bleeding. Do not touch burns or injuries
with your bare hands.
4. Do not move the patient unless you are certain he
can be moved safely.
5. Reassure the patient and keep him calm, warm, and
comfortable.
6. Do not administer liquids to an unconscious
person.
7. Watch for symptoms of shock.
8. Do not attempt too much. Do the minimum that is
essential to save life and to prevent the condition 
from worsening; but remember, you are only a layman.
There are two types of afflictions that can mar an
outdoor trip accidents and illnesses. The following
will 
give you a brief idea of what to do in the case of
the more common types of accidents and illnesses. 
There are several good books available on general
first-aid procedures, one of which is put out by the
St. 
John Ambulance Association, the volunteer first-aid
organization.
ACCIDENTS
Cuts, Scrapes, Abrasions. These types of wounds are
fairly common in the outdoors, resulting from falls, 
misuse of knives, and so on. What generally has to be
done in these cases is to stop the bleeding and 
prevent any infection. Make the patient sit or lie
down. Blood escapes with far less force when the 
patient sits quietly, and still less force when the
patient is prone. Elevate the bleeding part, except
in the 
case of a fractured limb. It is important to remember
not to remove any blood clot that has already 
formed. Remove any foreign bodies that are visible in
the wound and around it, by picking or wiping 
these off with a piece of clean dressing. Apply and


--- Page 195 ---
maintain pressure until the bleeding stops. Apply a 
dressing pad and a bandage.
In the case of lacerations stop the bleeding as
quickly as possible by applying hand pressure above
the 
wound; then apply a dressing pad.
In the case of very severe lacerations, a
constrictive bandage, such as a tourniquet, may have
to be used 
to stop or retard hemorrhaging. Be sure to loosen the
bandage every fifteen minutes so that the 
remainder of the limb receives an adequate supply of
blood.
In the case of hemorrhage, pressure will have to be
applied to the part of the wound from which the 
--- Page 105 ---
blood is coming. If a foreign body or a broken bone
is present in the wound, press alongside it and not 
over it. Dress the wound and continue the application
of pressure until the bleeding stops.
Fractures The most important thing to remember with a
fracture is to treat it on the spot. You should 
never try to move the casualty until the fractured
part has been immobilized, unless, of course, the
life of 
the patient is in danger from some other cause. If
circumstances dictate that final immobilization
cannot 
be completed on the spot, then sufficient temporary
immobilization should be carried out so that the 
patient can be moved safely to another location.
Generally speaking, hemorrhages and severe wounds 
should be dealt with before fractures.
Fractures can be immobilized by the use of bandages
and splints. Be careful when applying either of 
these - there may be more than one broken bone
involved. Bandages must be applied firmly enough to 
prevent harmful movement, but they must not be so


--- Page 196 ---
tight as to prevent blood circulation. In the case of
a 
broken limb, swelling may occur and then the bandages
will become too tight. If this happens, loosen 
them.
Splints should be long enough to immobilize the joint
both above and below the fracture. They must be 
firm and preferably wide and they should also be well
padded. Splints can be improvised from staffs, ski 
poles, pieces of wood, or even from stiff cardboard.
Once the fractured limb has been immobilized the 
patient should be moved out very carefully to medical
help.
Burns It is important when treating burns to avoid
handling the affected areas any more than necessary. 
Always make sure that your hands are as clean as
possible. Do not apply lotions of any kind. Do not 
remove burnt clothing, and do not break any blisters
that may form. Cover the burn with a prepared, dry, 
sterile dressing from your first-aid kit. You can
bandage the burned area firmly while seeking medical 
help, but if there are blisters present on the burn,
bandage only lightly.
Sunburn All outdoorsmen like to get out in the hot
summer sun, but watch out for sunburn! Prevention is 
the best cure for sunburn. Sunburn is treated in much
the same way as other bums. If the sunburn is 
severe, an antiseptic emulsion can be applied freely
and covered with a dressing or bandage. Leave the 
dressing on. Do not break any blisters that may form.
And remember, sunburn can also occur on a bright 
day in winter.
Windburn Windburn can also be a problem in the out-
of-doors. It can be treated in much the same way 
as sunburn, but it, too, can be prevented by wearing
proper clothing and by covering exposed areas of 
flesh with a lotion or cream to prevent the skin from
drying out on windy days.
Heat Exhaustion, Heat Stroke, and Sun Stroke All are
very serious if you are far away from medical 


--- Page 197 ---
help. The best treatment for all of these is to place
the patient in the coolest spot possible, to remove
his 
clothing, and to sprinkle him with water or wrap him
in a wet sheet and fan him. The idea here is to 
lower his body temperature. But take care not to
lower the temperature too much. When the temperature 
has been lowered, wrap the patient in a dry sheet and
continue to fan him. If his temperature rises again, 
repeat the treatment. In the case of heat exhaustion,
the patient may complain of feeling cold. If he does,
--- Page 106 ---
keep him comfortably warm. Watch his body temperature
carefully.
Heart Attacks It is very difficult, if not
impossible, for first-aid laymen to tell if a person
who becomes 
faint or unconscious is suffering from a heart
attack. If you are going into the outdoors with
someone 
who is known to have a heart condition, he will
probably have medication with him. Find out 
beforehand where his medication is kept and what the
dosages are.
In the case of a suspected heart attack, move the
patient as little as possible. Support him in a
sitting 
position, as a failing heart works more economically
this way than lying down. Be careful not to let him 
fall forward. Also, undo any tight clothing around
the neck or waist to lessen any impediment to blood 
circulation or breathing. Get the patient medical aid
as soon as you can.
Frostbite Frostbite and freezing are dangerous
because they may become extensive before you are
fully 
aware of them. If you engage in a lot of winter


--- Page 198 ---
sports, you should be on the alert for freezing.
As soon as frostbite is recognized, thaw the
frostbitten area by applying heat. For frostbite
spots on the 
face, a warm hand will sometimes suffice. Make
certain the area is dry. Do not rub or massage the 
frostbitten area. This may cause the tissues that are
fragile when frozen to break. Do not apply snow. 
Because snow is at air temperature, it will only make
the frostbite worse.
If a hand or foot is frozen, warm it very gradually,
and in the meantime, massage the parts adjacent to 
the frostbitten area so that circulation will be
increased. The patient can drink warm fluids, but you
must 
be careful not to apply any heat directly to the
frozen part. After thawing has taken place, an
antiseptic 
emulsion can be applied and the area can be bandaged.
Swelling, redness, and most likely blistering will 
occur sometime after the frostbitten part has been
thawed. Get the patient to a doctor as soon as
possible.
Snowblindness Snowblindness is becoming increasingly
frequent due to the growing popularity of 
winter sports such as snowmobiling, snowshoeing, and
cross-country skiing. Snowblindness is literally a 
"burning" of the eyes caused by light reflected in
all directions from snow. Treatment consists mainly
of 
shielding the eyes from light. Put a bandage around
the eyes and get the victim to medical aid as soon as
possible. The victim will probably need an opthalmic
ointment and a week or more of care to cure his 
eyes. Incidentally, people who have suffered from
snowblindness before are more susceptible to it.
Blisters Blisters are one of the medical scourges of
the outdoors. Every outdoorsman, at one time or 
another, gets a blister on his foot from a pair of


--- Page 199 ---
boots that just do not agree with him. The best way
to 
avoid blisters is to wear comfortable boots and good
socks. Make sure your boots are well broken in 
before going on long hikes or trips. If blisters do
occur, do not break them. Keep them bandaged with 
dry sterile gauze and let them dry up on their own.
Shock Shock is a condition of severe depression of
the vital functions. It can occur in conjunction with
most of the afflictions mentioned above. Shock is
generally associated with changes in the circulatory 
system, mainly due to loss of whole blood or plasma.
The severity of shock depends on the amount and 
rapidity of the blood loss. When treating any of the
conditions mentioned above, always watch for signs 
--- Page 107 ---
of shock. General symptoms of shock may vary from a
transient attack of faintness to a complete state of 
collapse. General signs include giddiness and
faintness, coldness, nausea, pallor, cold clammy
skin, a 
slow pulse rate which tends to become progressively
worse, vomiting, and unconsciousness.
Shock is treated by laying the victim on his back
with his head low and turned to one side (unless
there 
is an injury to the head or chest). Reassure the
patient and loosen clothing about the neck, chest,
and 
waist. Wrap him in something warm. If he complains of
thirst, give him sips of water, tea, or some other 
liquid, but no alcohol. Do not apply heat or friction
to the limbs. Get the patient to a doctor as soon as 
possible.
ILLNESSES
Illnesses are not very often encountered in the out-
of-doors. Perhaps the most common ones are 


--- Page 200 ---
diarrhoea and constipation due to change of habits
and change of food. Any first-aid kit should contain 
medication to combat either of these afflictions, but
if the conditions persist, the patient should go to a
doctor.
Nausea can occur on canoeing or boating trips to
people who are prone to seasickness. If you are prone
to seasickness, take along some anti-nausea pills
(available in any pharmacy).
People who suffer from hayfever or other allergies
sometimes have problems in the outdoors during the 
late summer and early fall because of the amount of
weed pollen in the air. People with known allergies 
should carry their prescribed medications with them.
Anyone going on a trip into the outdoors who has a
particular medical problem should make certain that 
he has enough prescribed medication with him for the
trip and in case of possible emergency. If you 
have any medications that should be taken at specific
times or for specific purposes, let your outdoor 
partner know about them.
A knowledge of first aid is particularly important in
the out-of-doors because so often medical help is a 
fair distance away. But the most important thing to
remember on your outdoor adventures is the old 
cliche about an ounce of prevention being worth more
than a pound of cure.
In this book, I have tried to pass on many of the
elemental skills and some of the basic know-how that 
everyone who ventures into the outdoors should have.
Some sections have dealt only with pleasures and 
esthetics, others have dealt with practical
knowledge, and some are for emergency use only.
But equally important, I have tried to give a
glimpse, a basic insight, into the rational use of
the 
outdoors. There are times when it is just as wrong to
lead a string of pack-horses over a mountain 


--- Page 201 ---
meadow as it is to shoot a bull elk. But there are
times when both can be done without nature being the 
loser. The real outdoorsman knows the right and the
wrong things, the right and wrong times.
--- Page 108 ---
