Document Title: Badass Survival Secrets



--- Page 1 ---


--- Page 2 ---
2


--- Page 3 ---
3


--- Page 4 ---
Copyright © 2015 Skyhorse Publishing
All rights to any and all materials in copyright owned by the
publisher are strictly reserved by the publisher.
All Rights Reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
in any manner without the express written consent of the
publisher, except in the case of brief excerpts in critical
reviews or articles. All inquiries should be addressed to
Skyhorse Publishing, 307 West 36th Street, 11th Floor, New
York, NY 10018.
Skyhorse Publishing books may be purchased in bulk at
special
discounts
for
sales
promotion,
corporate
gifts,
fund-raising, or educational purposes. Special editions can
also be created to specifications. For details, contact the
Special Sales Department, Skyhorse Publishing, 307 West
36th
Street,
11th
Floor,
New
York,
NY
10018
or
info@skyhorsepublishing.com.
Please visit our website at www.skyhorsepublishing.com
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Library
of
Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication
Data
is
available on file.
Cover design by Jane Sheppard
Print ISBN: 978-1-62914-733-8
Ebook ISBN: 978-1-62914-864-9
4


--- Page 5 ---
Printed in the United States of America
5


--- Page 6 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1:
Survival is an Unplanned Night in the
Woods
CHAPTER 2:
Search & Rescue
CHAPTER 3:
Basic Survival Tips
CHAPTER 4:
Navigation
CHAPTER 5:
Clouds: Foretellers of Weather
CHAPTER 6:
Water
CHAPTER 7:
Food
CHAPTER 8:
Firecraft
CHAPTER 9:
Medical
CHAPTER 10: Survival Shelters
CHAPTER 11: Survival Kits
CHAPTER 12: Edible/Medicinal Plants
6


--- Page 7 ---
CHAPTER 1
SURVIVAL IS USUALLY AN UNPLANNED NIGHT IN
THE WOODS
Each year dozens of American outdoor enthusiasts find
themselves in an unexpected outdoor emergency. They get
lost, injured, or stranded and suddenly find themselves
depending upon survival skills to survive. For most people,
thanks to modern communications such as cell phones and
two-way radios, it is merely a sobering two- or three-hour
adventure. In fact, with today’s methods of search and rescue,
the majority of missing people are found within 72 hours after
they have been reported missing, most even less. However,
for some who do not take the proper precautions or do not
have survival skills, such an experience can end in tragedy.
The purpose of this book is to help you prepare for that
“unplanned night or nights in the woods.” Keep it with you to
help you make it through the adventure. With proper
preparation for any outdoor activity, there should be little
reason for an unplanned night in the woods. But, should you
find yourself in a situation where you will need to survive
several days, this book will have you prepared to do it with
style. Survival knowledge and training pays off when the
chips are down. Remember the acronym, “LOST”—Lean On
Survival Training.
7


--- Page 8 ---
North America still has lots of back-country in which it is
easy to get lost or stranded. Even in the most remote country,
however, most missing people are found within a few hours.
SURVIVAL TRAINING PAYS
Several years ago, when I was working as a wildlife manager
in Georgia, I helped lead the search for a missing hunter in
the rugged mountains along the Georgia–North Carolina
boundary. We were told that this hunter had little hunting
experience but had received extensive survival training. In a
blinding rainstorm, it took us two days to find the lost hunter.
Much to our surprise, by the time we found him he had
virtually established a comfortable homestead.
8


--- Page 9 ---
A sudden spill in a canoe can leave you stranded.
When he first realized he was lost, he stopped walking and
picked an opening in the dense woods to establish a survival
camp.
He
immediately
put
out
ground-to-air
signals.
Realizing bad weather was on the way, he built a shelter
under some overhanging rocks that kept him dry and out of
the wind. He gathered plenty of firewood and stored it in his
shelter. Next, he built a fire complete with a reflector to keep
his shelter warm.
It was his fire that led to his being found. The hunter’s
survival camp was so comfortable that those of us in the
search party used it for an overnight rest before packing out.
9


--- Page 10 ---
When you first realize you are lost, stop. Do not wander
around aimlessly. For every hour you wander the search area
grows four times.
Due to his survival training, he lived comfortably through a
two-day storm. He stayed positive and worked toward being
found. He used the resources at hand to make a survival
camp. Will you be like this hunter if your time comes to
spend an unplanned night or two in the woods?
HOW TO USE THIS LITTLE BOOK
10


--- Page 11 ---
1. When you first get this book, sit down and READ it.
Think about what you are reading and how it can apply to you
and your outings.
2. Reread the chapter entitled “Survival Kits” and make a
list of the items you need to purchase to put one together.
3. On a weekend you want to do something that is fun and
educational, take your survival kit into the woods and spend
the night using the items in the kit. Upon completion of the
overnight test, be sure to replace any items that may be
difficult to repack into a compact package. This exercise may
also help you discover items you will want in your survival
kit that my list did not include. Remember it is YOUR
survival kit, so modify it to meet your needs.
4. This book covers only the most basic navigational skills. I
feel this requires training that, like first aid, you should have
before you start exploring the backcountry. If you haven’t had
training in the proper use of your GPS or map and compass,
get it ASAP. That alone can keep you from ever needing this
book.
5. This book covers only the most basic first-aid skills. It is
my belief that everyone who ventures into the backcountry
should have successfully taken a Red Cross first-aid course.
Also, those who have special medical conditions should be
skilled in managing them.
6. Place this book in your survival kit so it will be there if,
and when, you need it to guide you through a survival
situation. It was designed to be small enough to fit into your
11


--- Page 12 ---
kit, and concise enough to be a quick and easy resource when
you are in trouble.
7. If you find yourself in a lost or stranded situation, stop, sit
down, think, remain calm, don’t panic, and plan to stay put.
By gaining control of yourself in these first few minutes, you
have increased your chances of survival by 50 percent.
8. When you first realize you are lost and in trouble is the
time to dig this book out and use it to guide you toward a safe
wait until you are found.
9. As a Maine game warden once said, “Even in today’s
modern world there are many trappers and guides that spend
the night in the woods with little more than what is found in a
basic survival kit, they spend their lives doing it. Relax—you
may even enjoy your unplanned stay in the woods.”
Take a first-aid course and keep your training up-to-date. You
may have to treat your own injuries in a survival emergency.
12


--- Page 13 ---
CHAPTER 2
SEARCH & RESCUE
MODERN SEARCH & RESCUE WORKS FOR YOU
If you have taken the time and precaution to file a trip plan
with a responsible person before your outing, then should you
not return on time, you will not go unnoticed for very long.
This will begin a series of events that will result in your being
rescued quickly.
Many missing people give up hope quickly because they
think no one is looking for them. Modern search and rescue is
usually on the site within a few hours.
One of the most common, and dangerous, fears most lost or
stranded people have is that no one will know to come
looking for them. If you have followed the steps in the next
chapter of this book, then you can put this fear to rest; trained
people will be looking for you soon. If you stay put once you
realize you are lost, then it will take even less time to find
13


--- Page 14 ---
you. Trying to walk out, panicking and running will work
against you; and it will take much longer for rescuers to find
you. For every hour a lost person walks, the search area
grows four times larger. You should stay put and wait to be
found!
HERE IS HOW IT WORKS.
A search starts quickly when you are reported missing to local
authorities. In most cases, this is the county sheriff, district
forest ranger or conservation officer. In Canada it is usually
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Today, many of these
officers have received formal training in search and rescue
organization and know how to respond quickly to a missing
outdoorsman emergency.
When a missing outdoorsman report is turned in, the first
thing that usually happens is a “search boss” is designated.
This is someone with a lot of experience and training in
backcountry searches. He organizes the search and establishes
priorities. He will ensure that the site where the person was
last seen is quickly protected, set up a search headquarters
and interview those people who were last with the missing
person.
14


--- Page 15 ---
The search director will quickly establish the “area of
probability” and the search will be centered there.
Protecting the “last seen” area keeps well-meaning people
from destroying tracks and other important signs expert
trackers will need for tracking the lost person.
The interview with the missing person’s friends/family is
most important, as this is where the search boss learns much
about the missing person. If a trip plan has been left with
someone, it will cut down on the time it takes to get an
organized search started. They will have a good idea where to
begin looking.
Early in the search, specially trained dogs may be used to trail
the missing person. Two to four aircraft are used to quickly
locate missing outdoorsmen.
The interviewer will be looking for detailed information on
the missing person. The person’s name, address, description,
clothing worn, boot type (sole information is important to
trackers), age, equipment he has with him, medical conditions
including medications, experience in the outdoors, physical
15


--- Page 16 ---
condition, personality traits, etc. All of this information is
important to experienced searchers because it tells them a lot
about where to look for the missing person.
Usually the first searchers to hit the trail include trackers with
dogs and a hasty team. The hasty team is made up of highly
specialized people who go into the most likely areas the
missing person is believed to be. This is why it is important to
stay put when you first realize you are lost.
At the same time, lookouts and road check teams are posted.
Lookouts are located at observation points in the search area
and road search teams ride roads near the search area looking
for the missing person.
As quickly as possible, aircraft will be brought into the
search;
often
aircraft
with
specialized
equipment
to
electronically help find the missing person. At that point, the
search
boss
may
set
up
grid
searches
supervised
by
professionals and carried out using volunteers.
Many people who are lost fear searchers will only look a few
hours then give up, thinking the missing person is dead. This
is not true. Most search bosses estimate how long the missing
person can survive under the conditions and then plan to
search three times that long, if needed. Search efforts go far
beyond reasonable expectations.
Lost and stranded people should never give up hope. The
search will go on until you are rescued. How fast that search
begins, however, depends upon how well you prepared before
you went into the woods!
16


--- Page 17 ---
Aircraft are used to quickly locate missing outdoorsmen.
17


--- Page 18 ---
CHAPTER 3
BASIC SURVIVAL TIPS
“If hope is out there, hope can get you through.”
—NASA Astronaut Jerry Linenger, who spent
months stranded on the Russian Space Station
MAIN TIPS TO REMEMBER
THE ONLY PERSON YOU CAN ULTIMATELY COUNT
ON IS YOURSELF.
No one else can give you the mental will, physical stamina,
and common sense that you’re going to need to survive. So
don’t depend on others—you may be alone! Make your plans,
pack your own survival kit, and if something unplanned
happens when you are on your own in the wild, be prepared
to take care of your own needs as well as the needs of your
teammates.
This
self-sufficient
attitude
is
empowering
in
itself.
Remember that your life depends on what you do, not on the
chance that a teammate will be there to do for you what you
can’t do for yourself.
ALWAYS LEAVE BEHIND DETAILED PLANS AND
TIMETABLES WITH A TRUSTED PERSON.
That way, if you’re missing, a search party is likely to be sent
out sooner than later if you fail to arrive back when expected.
18


--- Page 19 ---
PREPARE FOR THE SIX CONTINGENCIES.
1. Becoming lost. It’s not enough to rely on your good sense
of direction. Always carry at least one compass, a map, and
GPS and a SPOT or locating device.
2. Darkness. With darkness we shift from relying primarily
on seeing to relying primarily on hearing. This is an
uncomfortable change for some people. Remember that
darkness can be your friend. Treat it with respect, and don’t
move into areas where you could get hurt by your inability to
see.
3. Being stranded. There are countless contingencies under
which you could be stuck in the wilderness for an extended
period of time. Anticipate that this could happen and plan for
ways to alert others and make your way to safety.
4. Illness or injury. Any time you go into the wilderness,
there’s always the possibility that you can become injured or
ill. Practice and develop your own wilderness first-aid skills.
5. Extreme weather. There is no such thing as bad weather,
just different types of weather. Always be prepared. Snow,
rain, or extreme heat or cold can impact your ability to
survive. Before heading out, make sure you have the proper
clothing, water, and the ability to shelter yourself for
extended periods of time.
IF LOST, STOP AND DO A MAP STUDY.
Don’t move unless you know where you are and where you
are going. Many very experienced point men and navigators
19


--- Page 20 ---
have become lost or disoriented in the wild. Remember that
the consequences of panic can be fatal. Take a break, do a
good map study, reevaluate your situation, and allow the
adrenaline that has flooded your system and put you in fight
or flight mode to subside.
ASSESS YOUR SITUATION AS OBJECTIVELY AS YOU
CAN.
1. Treat any injuries—yours or your teammates. Self aid and
buddy aid. Your health is most important for survival.
2. What needs to be done to assure your safety? Do you need
to move to a safer area?
3. Observe the area of your location. What are the hazards?
Are there enemy or friendly forces in the immediate area?
What are the advantages? Is there water nearby? What can
you take advantage of to help you survive?
4. Plan your next move carefully. Work out a plan in your
head first. If you’re satisfied with it, proceed. If not, give
yourself time to come up with a better alternative.
TAKE STOCK OF YOUR SUPPLIES AND IMMEDIATE
NEEDS.
A healthy man can survive for several weeks without food
and several days without water. So water is your most
important requirement. Under normal circumstances, the
human body requires two quarts of water daily to maintain
adequate hydration.
20


--- Page 21 ---
Don’t ration the water you have to last for many days. Drink
what you need. It’s better to have water in your body than in a
bottle or canteen. Conserve water lost through sweating by
wearing a hat, sitting in the shade, moving only at night, and
so on.
In most terrain, you will eventually find water when moving
downhill. Watch animals, or follow their tracks. They’ll
usually lead to water. Birds tend to congregate near water,
too. Remember that water from streams and ponds should be
boiled before drinking or purified by other means—tablets,
straw, filter, boiling, etc.
Maps
SIGNAL.
Always carry a whistle, mirror, and matches to start a fire.
Smoke is visible from far away in the day.
FIND FOOD.
Food isn’t an immediate concern unless you’re reasonably
sure that rescue is many days or weeks off. As a general rule,
avoid plant life unless you know for a fact that something is
edible. If it walks, swims, flies, slithers, or crawls, it’s
21


--- Page 22 ---
probably safe to eat. All fur-bearing animals are edible. All
birds are edible. Grubs found in rotten logs are edible, as are
almost all insects.
Raccoon footprints
FIRE REQUIRES THREE ELEMENTS:
Oxygen, fuel, and a source of heat. Is your fuel thin and dry
enough? Is your heat source hot enough to light the tinder? Is
there enough oxygen reaching the point where the heat meets
the fuel? Identify the problem and proceed.
SURVIVAL IS THE ABILITY AND THE DESIRE TO
STAY
ALIVE,
SOMETIMES
ALONE
AND
UNDER
ADVERSE CIRCUMSTANCES.
Understand and master each part of this definition.
1. Ability. Be proficient at building shelter, starting a fire,
signaling for help, and staying hydrated.
2. Desire. Regardless of how bad the situation might be,
never lose the will to survive and always maintain a positive
attitude.
22


--- Page 23 ---
3. Stay
alive.
Your
ability
to
effectively
deal
with
life-threatening medical situations is of the highest priority.
Stay current with your emergency medical skills.
4. Under adverse conditions. The more you know about your
environment ahead of time, the greater your advantage.
5. Alone.
Never
count
on
the
help
of
others.
Be
self-proficient since you may end up alone.
6. Until rescued, be patient. It’s your job to keep yourself
and your teammates alive.
LEARN TO DEAL WITH THE ENEMIES OF SURVIVAL:
1. Pain
2. Cold and/or Heat
3. Thirst
4. Hunger
5. Fatigue
THE RULE OF THREES
A human being can survive:
• three minutes without air
• three hours without a regulated body temperature
23


--- Page 24 ---
• three days without water
• three weeks without food
In summary, here is a list of common-sense survival tips:
1. Always carry a map, at least one compass, a GPS and a
SPOT or something similar.
2. Dress using layers to avoid overheating.
3. Carry water and water purification tablets or filter when
possible. During the map studies, always identify alternate
water sources.
4. Carry high-calorie energy food such as protein bars in
your second and third line gear.
Compass
THE CASE OF ARON RALSTON
Can you imagine amputating your arm with a blunt knife? As
excruciatingly painful and inconceivable as it sounds, that
turned out to be the only option left to 28-year-old Aron
Ralston after an 800-pound boulder fell on his arm, pinning it
to a canyon wall.
24


--- Page 25 ---
From midday Saturday, April 26, 2003, until midday
Thursday, May 1, Ralston was stuck in a remote area of
Canyonlands National Park in Utah alone and unable to free
himself. He had little food and water. No one would even
wonder where he was until he didn’t show up for work on
Tuesday. Unable to sit, lie down, use his right arm, or sleep,
he knew that he was in for an excruciatingly difficult time.
Those 120 hours of what he calls “uninterrupted experience”
tested to the fullest his physical, mental, emotional, and
spiritual being.
Finally, on May 1, 2003, he did the unthinkable, first using
the boulder to leverage his arm until the bones snapped and
then sawing away at muscle and tendon with his pocketknife.
He then rappelled down a sixty-five-foot wall and was later
found by hikers as he walked back to his car.
He survived, wrote a best-selling book about his experience
(Between a Rock and a Hard Place), and continues to climb.
He later admitted that his big mistake was not telling anyone
where he was going.
Canyonlands National Park, Utah
25


--- Page 26 ---
CHAPTER 4
NAVIGATION
Assess the threat and apply appropriate evasion principles.
1. Stay or Move Considerations
a. Stay
with
the
vehicle/aircraft
in
a
non-combat
environment.
b. Leave only when—
(1) Dictated by the threat.
(2) Are certain of your location, have a known destination,
and have the ability to get there.
(3) Can reach water, food, shelter, and/or help.
(4) Convinced rescue is not coming.
c. Consider the following if you decide to travel:
(1) Follow the briefed evasion plan.
(2) Determine which direction to travel and why.
(3) Decide what equipment to take, cache, or destroy.
d. Leave information at your starting point (in a non-combat
environment) that includes—
26


--- Page 27 ---
(1) Destination.
(2) Route of travel.
(3) Personal condition.
(4) Supplies available.
e. Consider
the
following
for
maps
(in
a
combat
environment):
(1) DO NOT write on the map.
(2) DO NOT soil the map by touching the destination.
(3) DO NOT fold in a manner providing travel information.
Note: These actions may compromise information if captured.
2. Navigation and Position Determination
a. Determine your general location by—
(1) Developing a working knowledge of the operational
area.
(a) Geographic checkpoints.
(b) Man-made checkpoints.
(c) Previous knowledge of operational area.
(2) Using the Rate x Time = Distance formula.
27


--- Page 28 ---
(3) Using information provided in the map legend.
(4) Using prominent landmarks.
(5) Visualizing map to determine position.
b. Determine cardinal directions (north, south, east, and
west) by—
(1) Using compass.
CAUTION: The following methods are NOT highly accurate
and give only general cardinal direction.
(2) Using stick and shadow method to determine a true
north- south line.
Stick and Shadow Method
(3) Remembering the sunrise/moonrise is in the east and
sunset/moonset is in the west.
(4) Using
a
wristwatch
to
determine
general
cardinal
direction.
(a) Digital watches. Visualize a clock face on the watch.
28


--- Page 29 ---
(b) Northern Hemisphere. Point hour hand at the sun. South
is halfway between the hour hand and 12 o’clock position.
(c) Southern Hemisphere. Point the 12 o’clock position on
your watch at the sun. North is halfway between the 12 o’
clock position and the hour hand.
Direction Using a Watch
(5) Using a pocket navigator—
(a) Gather the following necessary materials:
• Flat writing material (such as an MRE box).
• 1–2 inch shadow tip device (a twig, nail, or match).
• Pen or pencil.
(b) Start construction at sunup; end construction at sundown.
Do the following:
• Attach shadow tip device in center of paper.
29


--- Page 30 ---
• Secure navigator on flat surface (DO NOT move during set
up period).
• Mark tip of shadow every 30 minutes annotating the time.
• Connect marks to form an arc.
• Indicate north with a drawn arrow.
Note: The shortest line between base of shadow tip device
and curved line is a north-south line.
(c) Do the following during travel:
• Hold navigator so the shadow aligns with mark of present
time (drawn arrow now points to true north).
(d) Remember the navigator is current tor approximately 1
week.
CAUTION: The Pocket Navigator is NOT recommended if
evading.
Pocket Navigator
(6) Using the stars the—
30


--- Page 31 ---
(a) North Star is used to locate true north–south line.
(b) Southern Cross is used to locate true south–north line.
Stars
c. Orient the map by—
(1) Using a true north–south line—
(a) Unfold map and place on a firm, flat, level nonmetallic
surface.
(b) Align the compass on a true north–south line.
(c) Rotate map and compass until stationary index line
aligns with the magnetic variation indicated in marginal
information.
• Easterly (subtract variation from 360 degrees).
• Westerly (add variation to 360 degrees).
31


--- Page 32 ---
Orienting a Map Using a True North–South Line
(2) Using a compass rose—
(a) Place edge of the lensatic compass on magnetic north
line of the compass rose closest to your location.
(b) Rotate map and compass until compass reads
360 degrees.
32


--- Page 33 ---
Map Orientation with Compass Rose
(3) If there is NO compass, orient map using cardinal
direction obtained by the stick and shadow method or the
celestial aids (stars) method.
d. Determine specific location.
(1) Global Positioning System (GPS).
(a) DO NOT use GPS for primary navigation.
(b) Use GPS to confirm your position ONLY.
33


--- Page 34 ---
(c) Select area providing maximum satellite reception.
(d) Conserve GPS battery life.
(2) Triangulation (resection) with a compass.
Triangulation
(a) Try to use 3 or more azimuths.
(b) Positively identify a major land feature and determine a
line of position (LOP).
(c) Check map orientation each time compass is used.
(d) Plot the LOP using a thin stick or blade of grass (combat)
or pencil line (non-combat).
(e) Repeat steps (b) through (d) for other LOPs.
e. Use the compass for night navigation by—
(1) Setting up compass for night navigation.
34


--- Page 35 ---
(2) Aligning north-seeking arrow with luminous line and
follow front of compass.
(3) Using point-to-point navigation.
f. Route selection techniques follow:
(1) Circumnavigation.
(a) Find a prominent landmark on the opposite side of the
obstacle.
(b) Contour around obstacle to landmark.
(c) Resume your route of travel.
Compass Night Navigation Setup
35


--- Page 36 ---
(2) Dogleg and 90 degree offset.
(3) Straight-line heading as follows:
(a) Maintain heading until reaching destination.
(b) Measure distance by counting the number of paces in a
given course and convert to map units.
• One pace is the distance covered each time the same foot
touches the ground.
• Distances measured by paces are approximate (example in
open terrain, 900 paces per kilometer [average], or example in
rough terrain, 1200 paces per kilometer [average]).
(c) Use pace count in conjunction with terrain evaluation
and heading to determine location. An individual’s pace
varies because of factors such as steep terrain, day/night
travel, or injured/uninjured condition. Adjust estimation of
distance traveled against these factors to get relative accuracy
when using a pace count
36


--- Page 37 ---
Dogleg and 90 Degree Offset
(4) Deliberate offset is—
(a) Used when finding a point on a linear feature (that is
road or river).
(b) Intentionally navigated to left or right of target so you
know which way to turn at the linear feature.
(5) Point-to-point is same as straight line.
(a) Pick out landmarks on the heading and walk the trail of
least resistance to a point.
(b) On reaching a point, establish another landmark and
continue.
3. Travel Considerations
a. Pick the easiest and safest route (non-combat).
b. Maintain a realistic pace; take rest stops when needed.
c. Avoid overdressing and overheating.
d. Consider food and water requirements.
e. Take special care of feet (change socks regularly).
f. Pack equipment to prevent loss, damage, pack imbalance,
and personal safety.
37


--- Page 38 ---
g. Go around obstacles, not over or through them.
h. Travel on trails whenever possible (non-combat).
i. Travel in forested areas if possible.
j. Avoid creek bottoms and ravines with NO escape in the
event of heavy rains.
k. Consider the following for swamps, lakes, and unfordable
rivers:
(1) Circumnavigate swamps, lakes, and bogs if needed.
(2) Travel downstream to find people and slower water.
(3) Travel upstream to find narrower and shallow water.
4. River Travel
River travel may be faster and save energy when hypothermia
is not a factor. It may be a primary mode of travel and LOC in
a tropical environment (use with caution if evading).
a. Use flotation device (raft, log, bamboo, etc.).
b. Use a pole to move the raft in shallow water.
c. Use an oar in deep water.
d. Stay near inside edge of river bends (current speed is
less).
38


--- Page 39 ---
e. Keep near shore.
f. Watch for the following DANGERS:
(1) Snags.
(2) Sweepers (overhanging limbs and trees).
(3) Rapids (DO NOT attempt to shoot the rapids).
(4) Waterfalls.
(5) Hazardous animals.
g. Consider using a flotation device when crossing rivers or
large/deep streams.
5. Ice and Snow Travel
Travel should be limited to areas free of hazards.
a. DO NOT travel in—
(1) Blizzards.
(2) Bitterly cold winds.
(3) Poor visibility.
b. Obstacles to winter travel follow:
(1) Reduced daylight hours (BE AWARE).
39


--- Page 40 ---
(2) Deep soft snow (if movement is necessary, make
snowshoes). Travel is easier in early morning or late
afternoon near dusk when snow is frozen or crusted.
Improvised Snowshoes
(3) Avalanche prone areas to avoid:
(a) Slopes 30–45 degrees or greater.
(b) Trees
without
uphill
branches
(identifies
prior
avalanches).
(c) Heavy snow loading on ridge tops.
(4) If caught in an avalanche, do the following:
(a) Backstroke to decrease burial depth.
(b) Move hand around tace to create air pocket as moving
snow slows.
(5) Frozen water crossings.
40


--- Page 41 ---
(a) Weak ice should be expected where—
• Rivers are straight.
• Objects protrude through ice.
• Snow banks extend over the ice.
• Rivers or streams come together.
• Water vapor rising indicates open or warm areas.
(b) Air pockets form when a frozen river loses volume.
(c) When crossing frozen water, distribute your weight by
laying flat, belly crawling, or using snowshoes.
c. Glacier travel is hazardous and should be avoided.
6. Mountain Hazards
a. Lightning. Avoid ridge tops during thunderstorms.
b. Avalanche. Avoid areas prone to avalanches.
c. Flash floods. Avoid low areas.
7. Summer Hazards
(1) Dense brush.
(a) Travel on trails when possible (non-combat).
(b) Travel in forested areas if possible.
41


--- Page 42 ---
(c) Avoid creek bottoms and ravines with no escape in the
event of heavy rains.
(2) Swamps, lakes, and unfordable rivers.
(a) Circumnavigate swamps, lakes, and bogs if needed.
(b) Travel downstream to find people and slower water.
(c) Travel upstream to find narrower and shallow water.
8. Dry Climates
a. DO NOT travel unless certain of reaching the destination
using the water supply available.
b. Travel at dawn or dusk on hot days.
c. Follow the easiest trail possible (non-combat), avoiding—
(1) Deep sandy dune areas.
(2) Rough terrain.
d
In sand dune areas—
(1) Follow hard valley floor between dunes.
(2) Travel on the windward side of dune ridges.
e. If a sandstorm occurs—
(1) Mark your direction of travel.
42


--- Page 43 ---
(2) Sit or lie down in direction of travel.
(3) Try to get to the downwind side of natural shelter.
(4) Cover the mouth and nose with a piece of cloth.
(5) Protect the eyes.
(6) Remain stationary until the storm is over.
9. Tropical climates
a. Travel only when it is light.
b. Avoid obstacles like thickets and swamps.
c. Part the vegetation to pass through. Avoid grabbing
vegetation; it may have spines or thorns (use gloves if
possible).
d. DO NOT climb over logs if you can go around them.
e. Find trails—
(1) Where 2 streams meet.
(2) Where a low pass goes over a range of hills.
f. While traveling trails—
(1) Watch for disturbed areas on game trails; they may
indicate a pitfall or trap.
(2) Use a walking stick to probe for pitfalls or traps.
43


--- Page 44 ---
(3) DO NOT sleep on the trail.
(4) Exercise caution, the enemy uses the trails also.
10. Open Seas
a. Using currents—
(1) Deploy sea anchor. Sea anchor may be adjusted to make
use of existing currents.
(2) Sit low in the raft.
(3) Deflate the raft slightly so it rides lower in the water.
b. Using winds—
(1) Pull in sea anchor.
(2) Inflate raft so it rides higher.
(3) Sit up in raft so body catches the wind.
(4) Construct a shade cover/sail. (Sail aids in making
landfall.)
c. Making landfall. Indications of land are—
(1) Fixed cumulus clouds in a clear sky or in a cloudy sky
where all other clouds are moving.
(2) Greenish tint in the sky (in the tropics).
44


--- Page 45 ---
Anchor Deployment
Shade/Sail Construction
(3) Lighter colored reflection on clouds (open water causes
dark gray reflections) (in the arctic).
(4) Lighter colored water (indicates shallow water).
(5) The odors and sounds.
(a) Odors from swamps and smoke.
(b) Roar of surf/bird cries coming from one direction.
(6) Directional flights of birds at dawn and at dusk.
d. Swimming ashore—
45


--- Page 46 ---
(1) Consider physical condition.
(2) Use a flotation aid.
(3) Secure all gear to body before reaching landfall.
(4) Remain in raft as long as possible.
(5) Use the sidestroke or breaststroke to conserve strength if
thrown from raft.
(6) Wear footgear and at least 1 layer of clothing.
(7) Try to make landfall during the lull between the sets of
waves (waves are generally in sets of 7, from smallest to
largest).
(8) In moderate surf.
(a) Swim forward on the back of a wave.
(b) Make a shallow dive just before the wave breaks to end
the ride.
(9) In high surf.
(a) Swim shoreward in the trough between waves.
(b) When
the
seaward
wave
approaches,
face
it
and
submerge.
(c) After it passes, work shoreward in the next trough.
46


--- Page 47 ---
(10) If caught in the undertow of a large wave—
(a) Remain calm and swim to the surface.
(b) Lie as close to the surface as possible.
(c) Parallel shoreline and attempt landfall at a point further
down shore.
(11) Select a landing point.
(a) Avoid places where waves explode upon rocks.
(b) Find a place where waves smoothly rush onto the rocks.
(12) After selecting a landing site—
(a) Face shoreward.
(b) Assume a sitting position with feet 2 or 3 feet lower than
head to absorb the shock of hitting submerged objects.
e. Rafting ashore—
(1) Select landing point carefully.
(2) Use caution landing when the sun is low and straight in
front of you causing poor visibility.
(3) Land on the lee (downwind) side of islands or point of
land if possible.
(4) Head for gaps in the surf line.
47


--- Page 48 ---
(5) Penetrate surf-by—
(a) Taking down most shade/sails.
(b) Using paddles to maintain control.
(c) Deploying a sea anchor for stability.
CAUTION: DO NOT deploy a sea anchor if traveling
through coral.
f. Making sea ice landings on large stable ice flows.
Icebergs, small flows, and disintegrating flows are dangerous
(ice can cut a raft).
(1) Use paddles to avoid sharp edges.
(2) Store raft away from the ice edge.
(3) Keep raft inflated and ready for use.
(4) Weight down/secure raft so it does not blow away.
48


--- Page 49 ---
CHAPTER 5
CLOUDS: FORETELLERS OF WEATHER
About 200 years ago an Englishman classified clouds
according to what they looked like to a person seeing them
from the ground. He grouped them into three classes and gave
them Latin names: cirrus, cumulus, and stratus. These three
names, alone and combined with other Latin words, are still
used to identify different cloud formations.
By being familiar with the different cloud formations and
what weather they portend, you can take appropriate action
for your protection.
Courtesy
of
National
Oceanic
and
Atmospheric
Administration
CIRRUS CLOUDS
Cirrus clouds are the very high clouds that look like thin
streaks or curls. They are usually 6 kilometers or more above
the earth and are usually a sign of fair weather. In cold
climates, however, cirrus clouds that begin to multiply and
49


--- Page 50 ---
are accompanied by increasing winds blowing steadily from a
northerly direction indicate an oncoming blizzard.
Courtesy
of
National
Oceanic
and
Atmospheric
Administration
CUMULUS CLOUDS
Cumulus clouds are fluffy, white, heaped-up clouds. These
clouds, which are much lower than cirrus clouds, are often
fair weather clouds. They are apt to appear around midday on
a sunny day, looking like large cotton balls with flat bottoms.
As the day advances, they may become bigger and push
higher into the atmosphere, piling up to appear like a
mountain of clouds. These can turn into storm clouds.
50


--- Page 51 ---
Courtesy
of
National
Oceanic
and
Atmospheric
Administration
STRATUS CLOUDS
Stratus clouds are very low, gray clouds, often making an
even gray layer over the whole sky. These clouds generally
mean rain.
Courtesy
of
National
Oceanic
and
Atmospheric
Administration
NIMBUS CLOUDS
Nimbus clouds are rain clouds of uniform grayness that
extend over the entire sky.
51


--- Page 52 ---
Courtesy
of
National
Oceanic
and
Atmospheric
Administration
CUMULONIMBUS CLOUDS
Cumulonimbus is the cloud formation resulting from a
cumulus cloud building up, extending to great heights, and
forming in the shape of an anvil. You can expect a
thunderstorm if this cloud is moving in your direction.
Courtesy
of
National
Oceanic
and
Atmospheric
Administration
CIRROSTRATUS CLOUDS
Cirrostratus is a fairly uniform layer of high stratus clouds
that are darker than cirrus clouds. Cirrostratus clouds indicate
good weather.
52


--- Page 53 ---
Courtesy
of
National
Oceanic
and
Atmospheric
Administration
CIRROCUMULUS CLOUDS
Cirrocumulus is a small, white, round cloud at a high altitude.
Cirrocumulus clouds indicate good weather.
SCUDS
A loose, vapory cloud (scud) driven before the wind is a sign
of continuing bad weather.
53


--- Page 54 ---
CHAPTER 6
WATER
“Water is the driving force of all nature.”
—Leonardo Da Vinci
Getting lost or stranded in the wild is something that can
happen to anyone, whether you’re a Navy SEAL, experienced
outdoorsmen, hiker, tourist, or just someone out for a
weekend drive. Anybody can be forced to deal with
circumstances beyond their control, alone and lost, with only
their wits to rely on for survival.
The human body is composed of up to seventy-eight percent
water. So it’s no surprise that the single-most important thing
you need to live is not food; it’s water. The good news is that
if you’re resourceful and know where to look, you can find or
collect good drinking water in just about any environment on
earth.
54


--- Page 55 ---
The Institute of Medicine currently recommends a daily
intake of approximately 2 to 2 ½ quarts of water to replace
the water lost through normal body functions—urination,
defecation, breathing, and sweating. All of the chemical and
electrical activities that take place in the human body take
place in a water environment; when water is in short supply,
these activities begin to malfunction.
It’s important to understand that many people begin their
survival already dehydrated due to stress and other factors.
They often continue to dehydrate further when water supplies
are limited and the quality of any available water is suspect.
People needing water, but fearful that it is contaminated with
Giardia, Cryptosporidium, or other harmful pathogens, often
put off drinking or choose not to use the water at all.
IN NORTH AMERICA, AS A GENERAL RULE, IT IS
BETTER TO DRINK AVAILABLE FRESH WATER.
If the water contains harmful pathogens, the onset of
symptoms will usually be days, if not weeks away. By then
the individual will hopefully have access to medical care.
The one exception to this rule is that certain lakes mainly
found
in
the
western
United
States
contain
high
concentrations of calcium carbonate and calcium bicarbonate.
This water is not potable. Lakes containing these substances
are usually easy to identify because the calcium salts leached
from the soil are deposited in the form of white powder
around the shorelines. This water tastes terrible and should
not be consumed unless there is absolutely no other water
source available.
55


--- Page 56 ---
IN OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD, ESPECIALLY
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, DRINKING WATER THAT
HAS
NOT
BEEN
DISINFECTED
IS
NOT
RECOMMENDED.
Viruses such as hepatitis, not commonly found in North
American waters, are prevalent here and can quickly cause
incapacitating illness.
FINDING WATER
Throughout much of North America, fresh water can usually
be found in open sources such as lakes, ponds, rivers, and
streams. In most cases, it can be obtained fairly easily.
Remember that water always seeks the lowest level possible
and that, if present, some form of vegetation will most likely
grow nearby.
The best way to locate water is from a vantage point that
allows you to scan the surrounding countryside. Slowly and
methodically look for indicators such as green vegetation,
flocks of birds, trails left by domestic and wild animals, and
even large formations of rock that can contain natural springs.
Check
for
low-lying
areas—such
as
depressions
or
56


--- Page 57 ---
sinks—where rainfall or melting snow is likely to collect.
Water can often be found in these areas long after the last
precipitation, especially if they are shaded.
Water sources like these should be checked carefully since
they’re often contaminated with debris that has been washed
into the drainage. Finding the remains of animals that have
died nearby or in the water and other similar contaminants
will necessitate boiling the water, the use of halogens (iodine
or chlorine), or the use of a mechanical purification pump.
The quantity of water produced by seeps and springs tends to
vary greatly. Some of them produce no more than a few
teaspoons of water per hour. In other cases, gallons of water
can flow from the ground in minutes. Where the output is
slow and small, use the flat edge of the mouth on a plastic bag
to scoop up the water from a shallow source; if it is flowing,
use it to collect the water as it runs into the bag. A short piece
of vinyl aquarium hose also works well for sucking up water
from shallow collections or to recover water from narrow
cracks in the rocks.
Also, keep an eye out for man-made sources of water such as
windmills,
wells,
tanks,
dams,
and
irrigation
canals.
Windmills are common in parts of North America, especially
57


--- Page 58 ---
in areas where little surface water exists. In most cases, the
water pumped to the surface is collected in a nearby tank or
pumped directly into a trough from which livestock can drink.
Where an open source is not available, it may be necessary to
dismantle the piping associated with the windmill to gain
access to the water.
If you find an abandoned well where the rope and bucket
typically used to lift water from these wells is missing,
improvise a means to lower a container down into the well to
retrieve the water. If you don’t have a container, an item of
clothing can be lowered into the water to serve as a sponge.
In arid areas, particularly in the western and southwestern
United States, many state wildlife agencies and conservation
organizations
have
installed
rainwater
collectors
called
“guzzlers.” These are designed to gather precipitation and
feed it into a holding tank, where it remains until it is either
consumed by animals or evaporates.
Just because there’s no water visible on the surface of the
ground, that doesn’t mean that it’s not present in the soil in
sufficient quantity to be collected. Locate low-lying areas
where water is most likely to have accumulated and dig down
until damp layers of soil are found. The hole should be about
a foot in diameter. Over time, water may seep into the hole
where it can be collected. If no indicators of subsurface water
are present, dig a hole in the outside bend of a dry riverbed.
Look for a location where the centrifugal force of flowing
water has eroded the outer bend, creating a depression where
the last remnants of water flowing downriver will have
accumulated.
58


--- Page 59 ---
Groundwater collected this way is likely to be muddy, but
straining it through cloth will clean it and will get you by in
the short term. It’s important to remember that you’re taking a
risk anytime you drink ground water without purifying it.
Rain is a great source of drinking water and in most rural
areas can be consumed without risk of disease or illness. If
you have a poncho or some plastic sheeting, spread it out and
tie the corners to trees a few feet off the ground. Find a
container and tie the plastic on a slant so that the rainwater
can drain into it. If you can’t find a container, devise a
makeshift water bag by tying the plastic level on all four
corners but letting it sag in the middle so that the rainwater
can collect there. If the rainwater tastes different than what
you’re used to, it’s because it lacks the minerals that are
found in groundwater and in streams. If you don’t have a
poncho, rain gear, or piece of plastic, remember that water
will collect on the upper surfaces of any material (it doesn’t
have to be waterproof) and drain to the lowest point, where it
can be collected in a bucket or other container.
Melt snow before you consume it because if you eat it frozen,
you’ll reduce your body temperature, which can lead to
dehydration. The best technique to convert snow into water is
by using what military survival schools call a water machine.
Make a bag out of any available porous fabric (you can use a
T-shirt), fill it with snow, and hang it near (but not directly
over) a fire. Place a container under the bag to collect the
water. By continually filling the bag with snow you’ll keep it
from burning.
If your circumstances don’t allow you to make a fire, you can
melt snow with the heat of your body. But the process is slow.
59


--- Page 60 ---
Put several cups of snow in any available waterproof
container (preferably a soft plastic water bag, locking
sandwich bag, or something similar) and place it between
layers of your clothing or in your sleeping bag. Since the
amount of heat needed to convert snow to water is large and
the amount of body heat available is finite, only small
quantities can be melted at a time.
COLLECTING WATER
Heavy dew can be a good source of potable water. Before the
sun rises, tie absorbent cloth around your shins and walk
through high grass. This way you might be able to collect
enough water for an early morning drink.
Water droplets collecting on leaf.
BAMBOO
Fruits, coconuts, cacti, vines, palm trees, and bamboo can also
be good sources of liquid sustenance. Bend the top of a green
bamboo stalk down about a foot off the ground and tie it off.
Cut a few inches off the tip, put a container underneath, and
leave it overnight. The next day, you’re likely to find a nice
amount of clear, drinkable water.
60


--- Page 61 ---
Drinking water out of bamboo.
VINES
Water-producing vines varying in size from the diameter of a
pencil up to the thickness of a man’s forearm can be found
throughout much of the southeastern United States. The
thicker the vine, the more water it is capable of producing.
Select the thickest one first.
Bamboo is a good source of liquid sustenance.
Use a sharp knife or a machete to sever the tough, woody
vine. Vines that exude a white latex sap or those that produce
a colored or foul-smelling sap should be avoided. If no sap is
observed, or if the sap that is observed is clear and without
aroma, remove a twenty-four-inch section, severing the
higher end first and then the lower end. If the lower end is cut
first, the water contained within the vine is drawn up by
61


--- Page 62 ---
capillary action and far less water will drain out by the time
the upper end is severed.
Drinking water out of a vine.
Once removed, hold the section of vine vertically and the
water in it will drain into a container (or a cupped hand),
where it should be evaluated. Any liquid that is colored
should not be consumed. Liquid that has an unpleasant aroma
other than a faint “woody” smell should not be consumed but
can be used to satisfy any hygiene needs. Taste a small
amount of the water. Water that has a disagreeable flavor
other than a slightly “earthy” or “woody” taste should not be
utilized for drinking. Hold a small amount of water in your
mouth for a few moments to determine if there is any burning
or other disagreeable sensation. If any irritation occurs, the
water should be discarded. Liquid that looks like water,
smells like water, and tastes like water is water and can be
safely
consumed
in
large
quantities
without
further
purification.
CACTUS
Cactus as a source of water is often overrated. But if you
decide to approach one, use caution, as the thorns usually
cause infections. Use sharp sticks or knifes to handle cactus
62


--- Page 63 ---
safely. Any injury from a cactus plant should be treated
immediately to reduce the risk of infection.
The thicker the vine, the more water it is capable of
producing.
Although all cacti can be used for gaining additional
moisture, it can take a great deal of work to open a full-sized
barrow cactus and fight with the spiny thorns that protect it. If
you decide to take on a cactus, do it in the cool of the
evening. Using caution, remove the top of the barrow cactus.
Once the top is off, you will find a white substance that
resembles watermelon meat inside (this is a liquid-filled inner
tissue). Using your knife, cut out hand-size chunks and
squeeze the moisture from them.
Prickly pears are easier to collect and prepare. Use a large
sharp stick and a good knife. Stab the round prickly pear with
the stick, and then cut it off with the knife. Next, use a fire to
burn the thorns off of the cactus. Make sure you sear the
cactus well to remove even the smallest thorns.
63


--- Page 64 ---
Although overrated, cacti can still be used as a water source
in a pinch.
Once
the
thorns
are
removed,
peel
the
green-
or
purple-colored outer substance off, and eat the inside. Prickly
pear meat tastes so good that in Arizona and New Mexico
people
make
jellies
and
candies
from
it.
Chew
the
moisture-filled inner tissue, not the rough outer “bark.”
GETTING WATER FROM PLANTS
The use of clear plastic bags to enclose living vegetation and
capture the moisture transpired by the leaves can be an
effective method of collecting water. A plant’s survival is
dependent on its ability to gather water from the soil. This
water is passed up through the plant’s roots, stems, and
branches, and is finally released back to the atmosphere
through pores in the leaves as water vapor—a process called
evapotranspiration.
This water vapor can be collected with a clear plastic bag. It
works best when the vegetation is high enough to be off the
ground. Shake the vegetation to remove any insects, bird
64


--- Page 65 ---
droppings, or other materials that might contaminate the
water. Insert the limb or bush just like you would a hand into
a mitten. Then, tie the open end of the bag around the tree or
bush and seal the opening shut with a cord or duct tape. At the
closed end of the bag, tie a rock so the bag is weighted and
forms a collection point for the water.
Within a short period of time, water will begin to condense on
the inner surface of the bag, collect into water droplets, and
drain to the lowest point of the bag. The quantity of water
obtained in this manner is dependent on the amount of water
in the ground and the type of vegetation used. Other factors
that will determine water production include the amount of
sunlight available (it doesn’t work at night), the clarity of the
plastic bag, and the length of time the process is allowed to
work. It is not uncommon to find that two or three cups of
water, and sometimes much more, have accumulated over a
six- to eight-hour daylight period.
The best way to remove the water without disturbing the bag
is to insert a length of vinyl aquarium hose through the neck
of the bag down to the lowest point where water will collect.
The water can then be sucked out or siphoned into a
container. When enclosing vegetation in the plastic bag, it is
advisable to place a small stone in the lower corner where the
water will collect. The weight of the stone creates a
separation between the enclosed plant life and the water and
will keep plant saps from contaminating the water.
Similarly, leaves and small branches can be cut and placed in
a clear plastic bag. In this method, heat from the sun causes
the liquids in the foliage to be extracted and collect in the bag.
65


--- Page 66 ---
However, this method may produce water containing unsafe
toxins. Taste it first. If the water is bitter, do not drink it.
Solar stills are not reliable methods for collecting water in
arid areas.
SOLAR STILLS
The quantity of water produced by a solar still depends on the
amount of water contained in the ground. Because of this,
solar stills are not reliable for obtaining water in arid areas
since desert soils tend to hold little or no water. The amount
that a survivor is likely to obtain via this method must be
balanced against the amount of sweat lost while constructing
the device. However, in other types of climates, a solar still
can be very effective way of capturing water.
To build a solar still, dig a hole approximately one meter
across and two feet deep. Dig a smaller hole, or slump, in the
middle of the hole. Place a container in the slump to collect
the water. Then, cover the hole with a plastic sheet and secure
the edges of the sheet with sand and rocks. Finally, place a
rock in the center of the sheet, so it sags.
66


--- Page 67 ---
During daylight hours the temperature in the hole will rise
due to the heat of the sun, thereby creating heat vapors which
will condensate on the inside of the plastic sheet and run
down. It then drops into the container in the sump hole.
YOU SHOULD NEVER DRINK THE FOLLOWING:
• Blood
• Urine
• Saltwater
• Alcohol
• Fresh sea ice
Fresh sea ice is milky or grey, has sharp edges, does not break
easily, and is extremely salty. Older sea ice is usually
salt-free, has a blue or black tint and rounded edges, and
breaks easily. Melted old sea ice is usually safe to drink, but
should be purified first, if possible.
WATERBORNE CONTAMINANTS
In most parts of the world, surface water is seldom pure.
There are five basic waterborne contaminants that you should
be particularly aware of: turbidity, toxic chemicals, bacteria,
viruses, and parasitic worms.
TURBIDITY
67


--- Page 68 ---
A measure of the cloudiness of water, or more specifically a
measure of the extent to which the intensity of light passing
through water is reduced by suspended matter in the water.
The sources of turbidity can be attributable to suspended and
colloidal material, and may be caused by several factors such
as: microorganisms and organic detritus, silica and other
sands and substances including zinc, iron and manganese
compounds, clay or silt, the result of natural processes of
erosion and/or as waste from various industries.
TOXIC CHEMICALS
Dangerous and toxic chemicals include, among others,
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers from agricultural land and
runoff from household and industrial chemicals.
BACTERIA, VIRUSES, PARASITIC WORMS
Giardia lamblia is a parasite that lives in the intestines of
humans and animals. It’s expelled from the body in feces, and
is found worldwide and in every region of the United States.
It causes giardiasis, which produces cramping, nausea, and
diarrhea. Symptoms may not show up for two weeks, and
once present can last as long as six weeks. If infected, get
medical attention as soon as possible.
68


--- Page 69 ---
Giardia parasites can be found in lakes, ponds, rivers and
streams worldwide.
Cryptosporidiosis is another waterborne illness caused by
parasites found in feces. The same symptoms as giardiasis can
be expected, but more severe. Both of these parasites can be
found in soil and vegetation as well, so wash anything you
plan on eating in purified water and remember: To give
yourself the best chance at survival, always boil your water,
even if it looks clean.
WATER PURIFICATION AND DISINFECTION
To be safe to drink, water must be disinfected so that all
harmful microorganisms are removed. To do this water must
be boiled, treated with chemicals, or filtered. “Disinfection”
of water should not be confused with “purification” of water.
Some of the methods used to purify water may not remove or
kill enough of the pathogens to ensure your safety. Make sure
the water you drink is disinfected.
The first step to disinfecting water is to select the cleanest,
clearest source of water available. Inorganic and organic
materials such as clay, silt, plankton, plant debris, and other
microscopic organisms will reduce the effectiveness of either
chemical or filtration disinfection. Chemicals used to disinfect
water will clump to any particulate in the water, thus reducing
its ability to disinfect the water. And water containing a lot of
material will quickly clog a filtration system. For the best
results, collect water from below the surface but not off the
bottom. When collecting murky water, allow it to settle and
then filter it through your shirttail, bandanna, or other piece of
cloth.
69


--- Page 70 ---
REMEMBER:
Filtering water doesn’t always purify it, but it does reduce
particles and sediment and make the water taste better.
However, there are microbial purification filters on the
market that not only remove parasites such as Giardia, but
also kill waterborne bacteria and viruses. These types of
filters are optimal.
• Boiling is the best way of killing all microorganisms.
Boiling will not neutralize chemical pollutants.
• To purify water with chemicals, use water purification
tablets.
BOILING
Bringing water to a boil kills any organisms in it. In most
cases, water does not have to be boiled for a specific length of
time. The time it takes to bring water to a boil and the
temperature of the water when it boils is sufficient to kill
Giardia,
Cryptosporidium,
and
any
other
waterborne
pathogens. While the boiling point of water decreases as you
climb higher, the temperature at which the water boils is still
hot enough to kill those organisms that might make you sick.
Continuing to boil the water wastes fuel, evaporates the
water, and delays consumption.
70


--- Page 71 ---
Boil water to destroy any waterborne pathogens.
Overseas, especially in developing countries where river
systems are still a frequent method of sewage disposal,
boiling for a longer period of time (one or two minutes) is
advisable.
CHEMICAL PURIFICATION
Chemicals that have the ability to disinfect water are known
as
halogens,
and
include
iodine
and
chlorine.
The
effectiveness
of
halogens
is
directly
related
to
their
concentration, the amount of time they are left in contact with
the water, and the temperature of the water—the colder the
water the longer the contact time.
IODINE
Comes in tablet and liquid forms. I recommend the tablets
because liquid iodine is messy and the containers are prone to
leaking. Potable Aqua tablets (which contain iodine) are used
by the U.S. military and many disaster relief agencies.
71


--- Page 72 ---
Iodine kills harmful bacteria, viruses, and most protozoan
cysts found in untreated water. (It is NOT effective on
Cryptosporidium.) The recommend dosage of two tablets per
quart or liter of water is sufficient to kill organisms such as
Giardia. Once the tablets are placed in the water, they should
be allowed to sit for at least thirty minutes (even longer if the
water is very cold), and then shaken so that the iodine and
water mix thoroughly. The dissolved tablets will leave a slight
iodine taste in the water, which some find disagreeable.
Lemon juice, lemonade, Kool-Aid, or Gatorade powder can
be added to neutralize the iodine flavor.
Iodine tablets are commonly packaged with a second bottle of
ascorbic acid (PA Plus) tablets that deactivate the iodine,
making the water pleasant to drink. One tablet is usually
enough to reduce the iodine taste.
Iodine tablets deteriorate on exposure to heat, humidity, or
moisture. Over time, opening and closing the cap to remove
tablets results in the normally gray-colored tablets changing
to green or yellow. Once they have changed color, they have
lost their effectiveness and shouldn’t be used. Avoid using the
military iodine tablets that are sometimes found in military
surplus stores. The military got rid of them because their shelf
life has expired.
Advantage of iodine tablets:
• Easy to use
• Lightweight
• Inexpensive
72


--- Page 73 ---
Disadvantages:
• Not effective against Cryptosporidium cysts
• Some people are allergic to iodine
• People with known thyroid problems should not use iodine
• Iodine should not be used as a long-term (more than six
weeks) method of purifying water due to its potential harmful
effects on the thyroid.
CHLORINE
An effective agent against bacteria, viruses, and, unlike
iodine, cysts such as Cryptosporidium. Another advantage of
using chlorine is that it leaves no aftertaste. On the downside,
a significant disadvantage of using chlorine tablets is that you
have to wait for four hours after adding a tablet before you
can drink the water.
Advantages of Chlorine tablets:
• No aftertaste
• Chlorine kills Cryptosporidium
Disadvantages:
• Four-hour contact time
Almost all laundry bleaches, including Clorox, contain five
and one-half percent sodium hypoclorite, which is a suitable
73


--- Page 74 ---
purification chemical for water. Put a small amount in a bottle
with an eyedropper dispenser and add it to your E&E kit.
Make sure you do not use powdered, scented, or other
non-pure bleaches.
Before adding bleach to the water you want to purify, remove
all suspended material by filtration (through a cotton cloth,
improvised sand filter, or other means) or by simply allowing
sediment to settle to the bottom.
Add eight drops of bleach per gallon of water (or two drops
per quart). If the water was filtered, then shake it up to evenly
dispense the bleach, and wait fifteen minutes. If the water has
sediment on the bottom, don’t shake it up. Instead, allow the
treated water to stand for thirty minutes.
Because killing microorganisms also consumes the bleach,
you can tell by smelling whether or not there’s anything left
to kill. If there’s no chlorine odor then all of the bleach was
used up, meaning there could still be living organisms. Repeat
the dosage and allow the water to stand for another fifteen
minutes. If there is any chlorine odor, however faint, after
thirty minutes, all of the bacteria, viruses, and other
microorganisms are dead, and the bleach has done its job with
some to spare.
When treating cloudy, green, or really nasty water (swamp
water, for example), start with sixteen drops of bleach per
gallon of water (or four drops per quart). Smell the water. If
there’s a faint odor of chlorine, the water is drinkable. If not,
then repeat the treatment.
74


--- Page 75 ---
The Lifestraw eliminates 100 percent of waterborne bacteria,
ninety-nine percent of viruses, and particles as small as fifteen
microns.
TREATING LARGER QUANTITIES OF WATER
A teaspoon of bleach treats about 7 ½ gallons of clear water
or about four gallons of dirty water. Therefore, a tablespoon
of bleach treats about twenty gallons of clear water or about
ten gallons of dirty water. A quarter cup of bleach will purify
about ninety gallons of clear water or forty-five gallons of
dirty water.
LIFESTRAW
The LifeStraw is a portable filtration device that enables you
to safely drink directly from any fresh water source. The
straw itself is about eleven inches long, less than one inch
around, and looks like a jumbo drinking straw. One end has
the narrow mouthpiece; the other goes directly into the water
source. Each LifeStraw lasts for 185 gallons, roughly the
amount of water needed for one person per year.
75


--- Page 76 ---
The filter is designed to eliminate 100 percent of waterborne
bacteria, almost ninety-nine percent of viruses, and particles
as small as fifteen microns.
76


--- Page 77 ---
CHAPTER 7
FOOD
1. FOOD PROCUREMENT
A. SOURCES AND LOCATION.
(1) Mammals can be found where—
(a) Trails lead to watering, feeding, and bedding areas.
(b) Droppings or tracks look fresh.
(2) Birds can be found by—
(a) Observing the direction of flight in the early morning and
late afternoon (leads to feeding, watering, and roosting areas).
(b) Listening for bird noises (indication of nesting areas).
(3) Fish and other marine life locations.
(4) Reptiles and amphibians are found almost worldwide.
77


--- Page 78 ---
Fishing Locations
(5) Insects are found—
(a) In dead logs and stumps.
(b) At ant and termite mounds.
(c) On ponds, lakes, and slow moving streams.
B. PROCUREMENT TECHNIQUES.
(1) Snares-
(a) Work while unattended.
(b) Location:
• Trails leading to water, feeding, and bedding areas.
• Mouth of dens.
Snare Placement
(c) Construction of simple loop snare.
78


--- Page 79 ---
• Use materials that will not break under the strain of
holding an animal.
• Use a figure 8 (locking loop) if wire is used.
• • once tightened, the wire locks in place, preventing
reopening, and the animal’s escape.
• To construct a squirrel pole use simple loop snares.
• Make noose opening slightly larger than the animal’s head
(3-finger width for squirrels, fist-sized for rabbits).
(d) Placement of snares (set as many as possible).
• Avoid disturbing the area.
• Use funneling (natural or improvised).
Locking Loop
79


--- Page 80 ---
Squirrel Poel
Funneling
(2) Noose stick (easier and safer to use than the hands).
(3) Twist stick.
(a) Insert forked stick into a den until something soft is met.
(b) Twist the stick, binding the animal’s hide in the fork.
(c) Remove the animal from the den.
(d) Be ready to kill the animal; it may be dangerous.
Procurement Methods
80


--- Page 81 ---
(4) Hunting and fishing devices. (See image below for
fishing procurement methods.)
(a) Club or rock.
(b) Spear.
(c) Slingshot.
(d) Pole, line, and hook.
(e) Net.
(f) Trap.
Procurement Devices
(5) Precautions:
(a) Wear shoes to protect the feet when wading in water.
(b) Avoid reaching into dark holes.
81


--- Page 82 ---
(c) Kill animals before handling. Animals in distress may
attract the enemy.
(d) DO NOT secure fishing lines to yourself or the raft.
(e) Kill fish before bringing them into the raft.
(f) DO NOT eat fish with—
• Spines.
• Unpleasant odor.
• Pale, slimy gills.
• Sunken eyes.
• Flabby skin.
• Flesh that remains dented when pressed.
(g) DO NOT eat fish eggs or liver (entrails).
(h) Avoid all crustaceans above the high tide mark.
(i) Avoid cone-shaped shells.
82


--- Page 83 ---
Cone -Shaped Shells of Venomous Snails
(j) Avoid hairy insects; the hairs could cause irritation or
infection.
(k) Avoid poisonous insects, for example:
• Centipedes.
• Scorpions.
• Poisonous spiders.
(l) Avoid disease carrying insects, such as—
• Flies.
• Mosquitoes.
• Ticks.
C. PLANT FOODS. Before using the following guide use
your evasion chart to identify edible plants:
83


--- Page 84 ---
Note: If you cannot positively identify an edible plant and
choose to try an unknown plant, these guidelines may help
determine edibility.
(1) Selection criteria.
(a) Before testing for edibility, ensure there are enough
plants to make testing worth your time and effort. Each part
of a plant (roots, leaves, stems, bark, etc.) requires more than
24 hours to test. DO NOT waste time testing a plant that is
not abundant.
(b) Test only 1 part of 1 plant at a time.
(c) Remember that eating large portions of plant food on an
empty stomach may cause diarrhea, nausea, or cramps. Two
good examples are green apples and wild onions. Even after
testing food and finding it safe, eat in moderation.
(2) Avoid plants with the following characteristics:
Note: Using these guidelines in selecting plants for food may
eliminate some edible plants; however, these guidelines will
help prevent choosing potentially toxic plants.
(a) Milky sap (dandelion has milky sap but is safe to eat and
easily recognizable).
(b) Spines, fine hairs, and thorns (skin irritants/contact
dermatitis). Prickly pear and thistles are exceptions. Bracken
fern fiddleheads also violate this guideline.
(c) Mushrooms and fungus.
84


--- Page 85 ---
(d) Umbrella shaped flowers (hemlock is eliminated).
(e) Bulbs (only onions smell like onions).
(f) Grain heads with pink, purplish, or black spurs.
(g) Beans, bulbs, or seeds inside pods.
(h) Old or wilted leaves.
(i) Plants with shiny leaves.
(j) White and yellow berries. (Aggregate berries such as
black and dewberries are always edible, test all others before
eating.)
(k) Almond scent in woody parts and leaves.
D. TEST PROCEDURES.
CAUTION: Test all parts of the plant for edibility. Some
plants have both edible and inedible parts. NEVER ASSUME
a part that proved edible when cooked is edible raw, test the
part raw before eating. The same part or plant may produce
varying reactions in different individuals.
(1) Test only 1 part of a plant at a time.
(2) Separate the plant into its basic components (stems,
roots, buds, and flowers).
(3) Smell the food for strong acid odors. Remember, smell
alone does not indicate a plant is edible or inedible.
85


--- Page 86 ---
(4) DO NOT eat 8 hours before the test and drink only
purified water.
(5) During the 8 hours you abstain from eating, test for
contact poisoning by placing a piece of the plant on the inside
of your elbow or wrist. The sap or juice should contact the
skin. Usually 15 minutes is enough time to allow for a
reaction.
(6) During testing, take NOTHING by mouth EXCEPT
purified water and the plant you are testing.
(7) Select a small portion of a single part and prepare it the
way you plan to eat it.
(8) Before placing the prepared plant in your mouth, touch a
small portion (a pinch) to the outer surface of your lip to test
for burning or itching.
(9) If after 3 minutes there is no reaction on your lip, place
the plant on your tongue and hold it for 15 minutes.
(10) If there is no reaction, thoroughly chew a pinch and hold
it in your mouth for 15 minutes (DO NOT SWALLOW). If
any ill effects occur, rinse out your mouth with water.
(11) If nothing abnormal occurs, swallow the food and wait 8
hours. If any ill-effects occur during this period, induce
vomiting and drink a water and charcoal mixture.
(12) If no ill effects occur, eat 1/4 cup of the same plant
prepared the same way. Wait another 8 hours. If no ill effects
occur, the plant part as prepared is safe for eating.
86


--- Page 87 ---
CAUTION: 1. Ripe tropical fruits should be peeled and eaten
raw. Softness, rather than color, is the best indicator of
ripeness. Cook unripe fruits and dis-card seeds and skin.
2. Cook underground portions when possible to reduce
bacterial contamination and ease digestion of their generally
high starch content.
3. During evaluation, you may not be able to cook.
Concentrate your efforts on leafy green plants, ripe fruits, and
above ground ripe vegetables not requiring signification
preparation.
2. FOOD PREPARATION
Animal food gives the greatest food value per pound.
A. BUTCHERING AND SKINNING.
(1) Mammals.
(a) Remove the skin and save for other uses.
(a) One cut skinning of small game.
• Open the abdominal cavity.
• Avoid rupturing the intestines.
• Remove the intestines.
• Save inner organs (heart, liver, and kidneys) and all meaty
parts of the skull, brain, tongue, and eyes.
87


--- Page 88 ---
(b) Wash when ready to use.
(c) If preserving the meat, remove it from the bones.
(d) Unused or inedible organs and entrails may be used as
bait for other game.
Small Game Skinning
(2) Frogs and snakes.
(a) Skin.
(b) Discard skin, head with 2 inches of body, and internal
organs.
(3) Fish.
(a) Scale (if necessary) and gut fish soon after it is caught.
(b) Insert knifepoint into anus of fish and cut open the belly.
(c) Remove entrails.
(d) Remove gills to prevent spoilage.
88


--- Page 89 ---
(4) Birds.
(a) Gut soon after killing.
(b) Protect from flies.
(c) Skin or pluck them.
(d) Skin scavengers and sea birds.
(5) Insects.
(a) Remove
all
hard
portions
such
as
the
legs
of
grasshoppers or crickets. (The rest is edible.)
(b) Recommend cooking grasshopper-size insects.
CAUTION: Dead insects spoil rapidly, DO NOT save.
(6) Fruits, berries, and most nuts can be eaten raw.
B. COOKING.
CAUTION: To kill parasites, thoroughly cook all wild game,
freshwater
fish,
clams,
mussels,
snails,
crawfish,
and
scavenger birds. Saltwater fish may be eaten raw.
(1) Boiling (most nutritious method of cooking-drink the
broth).
(a) Make metal cooking containers from ration cans.
89


--- Page 90 ---
(b) Drop heated rocks into containers to boil water or cook
food.
(2) Baking.
(a) Wrap in leaves or pack in mud.
(b) Bury food in dirt under coals of fire.
(3) Leaching. Some nuts (acorns) must be leached to remove
the bitter taste of tannin. Use one of the following leaching
methods:
(a) First method:
• Soaking and pouring the water off.
• Crushing and pouring water through. Cold water should be
tried first; however, boiling water is sometimes best.
• Discarding water.
(b) Second method:
• Boil, pour off water, and taste the plant.
• If bitter, repeat process until palatable.
(4) Roasting.
(a) Shake shelled nuts in a container with hot coals.
(b) Roast thinly sliced meat and insects over a candle.
90


--- Page 91 ---
3. FOOD PRESERVATION
b. Keeping an animal alive.
c. Refrigerating.
(1) Long term.
(a) Food
buried
in
snow
maintains
a
temperature
of
approximately 32 degrees F.
(b) Frozen food will not decompose (freeze in meal-size
portions).
(2) Short term.
(a) Food wrapped in waterproof material and placed in a
stream remains cool in summer months.
(b) Earth below the surface, particularly in shady areas or
along streams, is cooler than the surface.
(c) Wrap food in absorbent material such as cotton and
re-wet as the water evaporates.
c. Drying and smoking removes moisture and preserves
food.
(1) Use salt to improve flavor and promote drying.
(2) Cut or pound meat into thin strips.
(3) Remove fat.
91


--- Page 92 ---
(4) DO NOT use pitch woods such as fir or pine; they
produce soot giving the meat an undesirable taste.
d. Protecting meat from animals and insects.
(1) Wrapping food.
(a) Use clean material.
(b) Wrap pieces individually.
(c) Ensure all corners of the wrapping are insect proof.
(d) Wrap soft fruits and berries in leaves or moss.
(2) Hanging meat.
(a) Hang meat in the shade.
(b) Cover during daylight hours to protect from insects.
(3) Packing meat on the trail.
(a) Wrap before flies appear in the morning.
(b) Place meat in fabric or clothing for insulation.
(c) Place meat inside the pack for carrying. Soft material
acts as insulation helping keep the meat cool.
(d) Carry shellfish, crabs, and shrimp in wet seaweed.
e. DO NOT store food in the shelter; it attracts unwanted
animals.
92


--- Page 93 ---
CHAPTER 8
FIRECRAFT
In many survival situations, the ability to start a fire can make
the difference between living and dying. Fire can fulfill many
needs. It can provide warmth and comfort. It not only cooks
and preserves food, but it also provides warmth in the form of
heated food that saves calories your body normally uses to
produce body heat. You can use fire to purify water, sterilize
bandages, signal for rescue, and provide protection from
animals. It can be a psychological boost by providing peace
of mind and companionship. You can also use fire to produce
tools and weapons.
Fire can cause problems, as well. It can cause forest fires or
destroy essential equipment. Fire can also cause burns and
carbon monoxide poisoning when used in shelters.
BASIC FIRE PRINCIPLES
To build a fire, it helps to understand the basic principles of a
fire. Fuel (in a nongaseous state) does not burn directly. When
you apply heat to a fuel, it produces a gas. This gas, combined
with oxygen in the air, burns.
93


--- Page 94 ---
Understanding the concept of the fire triangle is very
important in correctly constructing and maintaining a fire.
The three sides of the triangle represent air, heat, and fuel. If
you remove any of these, the fire will go out. The correct ratio
of these components is very important for a fire to burn at its
greatest capability. The only way to learn this ratio is to
practice.
SITE SELECTION AND PREPARATION
You will have to decide what site and arrangement to use.
Before building a fire, consider:
• The area (terrain and climate) in which you are operating.
• The materials and tools available.
• How much time you have?
• Why do you need a fire?
• Look for a dry spot that:
• Is protected from the wind.
• Is suitably placed in relation to your shelter (if any).
• Will concentrate the heat in the direction you desire.
• Has a supply of wood or other fuel available. (See page 7-6
for types of material you can use.)
94


--- Page 95 ---
If you are in a wooded or brush-covered area, clear the brush
and scrape the surface soil from the spot you have selected.
Clear a circle at least 1 meter in diameter so there is little
chance of the fire spreading. If time allows, construct a fire
wall using logs or rocks. This wall will help to reflect or
direct the heat where you want it (Figure 8-l). It will also
reduce flying sparks and cut down on the amount of wind
blowing into the fire. However, you will need enough wind to
keep the fire burning.
CAUTION
Do not use wet or porous rocks as they may explode when
heated.
Types of fire walls
In some situations, you may find that an underground
fireplace will best meet your needs. It conceals the fire and
serves well for cooking food. To make an underground
fireplace or Dakota fire hole:
• Dig a hole in the ground.
• On the upwind side of this hole, poke or dig a large
connecting hole for ventilation.
95


--- Page 96 ---
• Build your fire in the hole as illustrated.
If you are in a snow-covered area, use green logs to make a
dry base for your fire. Trees with wrist-sized trunks are easily
broken in extreme cold. Cut or break several green logs and
lay them side by side on top of the snow. Add one or two
more layers. Lay the top layer of logs opposite those below it.
Dakota fire hole.
Base for fire in snow-covered area.
FIRE MATERIAL SELECTION
You need three types of materials to build a fire—tinder,
kindling, and fuel.
96


--- Page 97 ---
Tinder is dry material that ignites with little heat—a spark
starts a fire. The tinder must be absolutely dry to be sure just a
spark will ignite it. If you only have a device that generates
sparks, charred cloth will be almost essential. It holds a spark
for long periods, allowing you to put tinder on the hot area to
generate a small flame. You can make charred cloth by
heating cotton cloth until it turns black, but does not burn.
Once it is black, you must keep it in an airtight container to
keep it dry. Prepare this cloth well in advance of any survival
situation. Add it to your individual survival kit.
Kindling is readily combustible material that you add to the
burning tinder. Again, this material should be absolutely dry
to
ensure
rapid
burning.
Kindling
increases
the
fire’s
temperature so that it will ignite less combustible material.
Fuel is less combustible material that burns slowly and
steadily once ignited.
HOW TO BUILD A FIRE
There are several methods for laying a fire, each of which has
advantages. The situation you find yourself in will determine
which fire to use.
TEPEE
To make this fire, arrange the tinder and a few sticks of
kindling in the shape of a tepee or cone. Light the center. As
the tepee burns, the outside logs will fall inward, feeding the
fire. This type of fire burns well even with wet wood.
LEAN-TO
97


--- Page 98 ---
To lay this fire, push a green stick into the ground at a
30-degree angle. Point the end of the stick in the direction of
the wind. Place some tinder deep under this lean-to stick.
Lean pieces of kindling against the lean-to stick. Light the
tinder. As the kindling catches fire from the tinder, add more
kindling.
Tinder
Kindling
Fuel
• Birch bark
• Shredded inner
bark from cedar,
chestnut, red elm
trees
• Fine
wood
shavings
• Dead
grass,
ferns, moss, fungi
• Straw
• Sawdust
• Small twigs
• Small
strips
of
wood
• Split wood
• Heavy cardboard
• Pieces
of
wood
removed
from
the
inside
of
larger
pieces
• Wood
that
has
been
doused
with
highly
flammable
materials,
such
as
gasoline, oil or wax
• Dry,
standing
wood and dry, dead
branches
• Dry inside (heart)
of fallen tree trunks
and large branches
• Green wood that
is finely split
• Dry
grasses
twisted into bunches
• Peat dry enough
to burn (this may be
found at the top of
undercut banks)
• Very
fine
pitchwood
scrapings
• Dried
animal
dung
98


--- Page 99 ---
• Dead
evergreen needles
• Punk
(the
completely rotted
portions of dead
logs or trees)
• Evergreen tree
knots
• Bird
down
(fine feathers)
• Down
seed
heads (milkweed,
dry
cattails,
bulrush,
or
thistle)
• Fine,
dried
vegetable fibers
• Spongy threads
of dead puffball
• Dead
palm
leaves
• Animal fats
• Coal, oil shale, or
oil
lying
on
the
surface
99


--- Page 100 ---
• Skin-like
membrane lining
bamboo
• Lint
from
pocket and seams
• Charred cloth
• Waxed paper
• Outer bamboo
shavings
• Gunpowder
• Cotton
• Lint
Materials for building fires.
CROSS-DITCH
To use this method, scratch a cross about 12 inches in size in
the ground. Dig the cross 3 inches deep. Put a large wad of
tinder in the middle of the cross. Build a kindling pyramid
above the tinder. The shallow ditch allows air to sweep under
the tinder to provide a draft.
PYRAMID
100


--- Page 101 ---
To lay this fire, place two small logs or branches parallel on
the ground. Place a solid layer of small logs across the
parallel logs. Add three or four more layers of logs or
branches, each layer smaller than and at a right angle to the
layer below it. Make a starter fire on top of the pyramid. As
the starter fire burns, it will ignite the logs below it. This
gives you a fire that burns downward, requiring no attention
during the night.
Methods for laying fires.
There are several other ways to lay a fire that are quite
effective. Your situation and the material available in the area
may make another method more suitable.
HOW TO LIGHT A FIRE
Always light your fire from the upwind side. Make sure to lay
your tinder, kindling, and fuel so that your fire will burn as
long as you need it. Igniters provide the initial heat required
101


--- Page 102 ---
to start the tinder burning. They fall into two categories:
modem methods and primitive methods.
MODERN METHODS
Modem igniters use modem devices—items we normally
think of to start a fire.
Matches
Make sure these matches are waterproof. Also, store them in a
waterproof container along with a dependable striker pad.
Convex Lens
Use this method (Figure 8-6) only on bright, sunny days. The
lens can come from binoculars, camera, telescopic sights, or
magnifying glasses. Angle the lens to concentrate the sun’s
rays on the tinder. Hold the lens over the same spot until the
tinder begins to smolder. Gently blow or fan the tinder into
flame, and apply it to the fire lay.
Metal Match
Place a flat, dry leaf under your tinder with a portion exposed.
Place the tip of the metal match on the dry leaf, holding the
metal match in one hand and a knife in the other. Scrape your
knife against the metal match to produce sparks. The sparks
will hit the tinder. When the tinder starts to smolder, proceed
as above.
Battery
102


--- Page 103 ---
Use a battery to generate a spark. Use of this method depends
on the type of battery available. Attach a wire to each
terminal. Touch the ends of the bare wires together next to the
tinder so the sparks will ignite it.
Gunpowder
If you have ammunition with you, carefully extract the bullet
from the shell casing, and use the gunpowder as tinder. A
spark will ignite the powder. Be extremely careful when
extracting the bullet from the case.
PRIMITIVE METHODS
Primitive igniters are those attributed to our early ancestors.
Flint and Steel
The direct spark method is the easiest of the primitive
methods to use. The flint and steel method is the most reliable
of the direct spark methods. Strike a flint or other hard,
sharp-edged rock edge with a piece of carbon steel (stainless
steel will not produce a good spark). This method requires a
loose-jointed wrist and practice. When a spark has caught in
the tinder, blow on it. The spark will spread and burst into
flames.
Fire-Plow
The fire-plow is a friction method of ignition. You rub a
hardwood shaft against a softer wood base. To use this
method, cut a straight groove in the base and plow the blunt
tip of the shaft up and down the groove. The plowing action
103


--- Page 104 ---
of the shaft pushes out small particles of wood fibers. Then,
as you apply more pressure on each stroke, the friction ignites
the wood particles.
Lens method.
Bow and Drill
The technique of starting a fire with a bow and drill (Figure
8-8) is simple, but you must exert much effort and be
persistent to produce a fire. You need the following items to
use this method:
• Socket. The socket is an easily grasped stone or piece of
hardwood or bone with a slight depression in one side. Use it
to hold the drill in place and to apply downward pressure.
• Drill. The drill should be a straight, seasoned hardwood
stick about 2 centimeters in diameter and 25 centimeters long.
The top end is round and the low end blunt (to produce more
friction).
• Fire board. Its size is up to you. A seasoned softwood
board about 2.5 centimeters thick and 10 centimeters wide is
preferable. Cut a depression about 2 centimeters from the
104


--- Page 105 ---
edge on one side of the board. On the underside, make a
V-shaped cut from the edge of the board to the depression.
• Bow. The bow is a resilient, green stick about 2.5
centimeters in diameter and a string. The type of wood is not
important. The bowstring can be any type of cordage. You tie
the bowstring from one end of the bow to the other, without
any slack.
To use the bow and drill, first prepare the fire lay. Then place
a bundle of tinder under the V-shaped cut in the fire board.
Place one foot on the fire board. Loop the bowstring over the
drill and place the drill in the precut depression on the fire
board. Place the socket, held in one hand, on the top of the
drill to hold it in position. Press down on the drill and saw the
bow back and forth to twirl the drill. Once you have
established a smooth motion, apply more downward pressure
and work the bow faster. This action will grind hot black
powder into the tinder, causing a spark to catch. Blow on the
tinder until it ignites.
Fire-plow.
105


--- Page 106 ---
Bow and drill.
Note: Primitive fire-building methods are exhaustive and
require practice to ensure success.
HELPFUL HINTS
Use nonaromatic seasoned hardwood for fuel, if possible.
Collect kindling and tinder along the trail.
Add insect repellent to the tinder.
Keep the firewood dry.
Dry damp firewood near the fire.
Bank the fire to keep the coals alive overnight, Carry lighted
punk, when possible.
Be sure the fire is out before leaving camp.
106


--- Page 107 ---
Do not select wood lying on the ground. It may appear to be
dry but generally doesn’t provide enough friction.
107


--- Page 108 ---
CHAPTER 9
MEDICAL
WARNING: These emergency medical procedures are for
survival situations. Obtain professional medical treatment as
soon as possible.
1. IMMEDIATE FIRST AID ACTIONS
Remember the ABCs of Emergency care:
AirwayBreathingCirculation
a. Determine responsiveness as follows:
(1) If unconscious, arouse by shaking gently and shouting.
(2) If no response—
(a) Keep head and neck aligned with body.
(b) Roll victims onto their backs.
(c) Open the airway by lifting the chin.
(d) Look, listen, and feel for air exchange.
(3) If victim is not breathing—
(a) Check for a clear airway; remove any blockage.
(b) Cover victim’s mouth with your own.
108


--- Page 109 ---
(c) Pinch victim’s nostrils closed.
(d) Fill victim’s lungs with 2 slow breaths.
(e) If breaths are blocked, reposition airway; try again.
(f) If breaths still blocked, give 5 abdominal thrusts:
Chin Lift
• Straddle the victim.
• Place a fist between breastbone and belly button.
• Thrust upward to expel air from stomach
(g) Sweep with finger to clear mouth,
(h) Try 2 slow breaths again.
(i) If the airway is still blocked, continue (c) through (f) until
successful or exhausted.
(j) With open airway, start mouth to mouth breathing:
109


--- Page 110 ---
• Give 1 breath every 5 seconds.
• Check for chest rise each time.
(4) If victim is unconscious, but breathing—
(a) Keep head and neck aligned with body.
(b) Roll victim on side (drains the mouth and prevents the
tongue from blocking airway).
CAUTION: DO NOT remove an impaled object unless it
interferes with the airway. You may cause more tissue
damage and increase bleeding. For travel, you may shorten
and secure the object.
b. Control bleeding as follows:
(1) Apply a pressure dressing.
(2) If STILL bleeding—
(a) Use direct pressure over the wound.
(b) Elevate the wounded area above the heart.
110


--- Page 111 ---
Application of a Pressure Dressing
(3) If STILL bleeding—
(a) Use a pressure point between the injury and the heart.
(b) Maintain pressure for 6 to 10 minutes before checking to
see if bleeding has stopped.
111


--- Page 112 ---
Pressure Points
CAUTION: Use of a tourniquet is a LAST RESORT
measure. Use ONLY when severe, uncontrolled bleeding will
cause loss of life. Recognize that long-term use of a
tourniquet may cause loss of limb.
(4) If a limb wound is STILL bleeding—
(a) Apply tourniquet (TK) band just above bleeding site on
limb. A band at least 3 inches (7.5 cm) or wider is best.
(b) Follow steps illustrated on page 80.
(c) Use a stick at least 6 inches (15 cm) long.
112


--- Page 113 ---
(d) Tighten only enough to stop arterial bleeding.
(e) Mark a TK on the forehead with the time applied.
(f) DO NOT cover the tourniquet.
CAUTION: The following directions apply ONLY in survival
situations where rescue is UNLIKELY and NO medical aid is
available.
(g) If rescue or medical aid is not available for over 2 hours,
an attempt to SLOWLY loosen the tourniquet may be made
20 minutes after application. Before loosening—
• Ensure pressure dressing is in place.
• Ensure bleeding has stopped
• Loosen tourniquet SLOWLY to restore circulation.
• Leave loosened tourniquet in position in case bleeding
resumes.
c. Treat shock. (Shock is difficult to identify or treat under
field conditions. It may be present with or without visible
injury.)
(1) Identify by one or more of the following:
(a) Pale, cool, and sweaty skin.
(b) Fast breathing and a weak, fast pulse.
113


--- Page 114 ---
(c) Anxiety or mental confusion.
(d) Decreased urine output.
(2) Maintain circulation.
(3) Treat underlying injury.
(4) Maintain normal body temperature.
(a) Remove wet clothing.
(b) Give warm fluids.
• DO NOT give fluids to an unconscious victim.
• DO NOT give fluids if they cause victim to gag.
114


--- Page 115 ---
Application of a Tourniquet
(c) Insulate from ground.
(d) Shelter from the elements.
(5) Place conscious victim on back.
(6) Place very weak or unconscious victim on side, this
will—
(a) Allow mouth to drain.
115


--- Page 116 ---
(b) Prevent tongue from blocking airway.
d. Treat chest injuries.
(1) Sucking chest wound. This occurs when chest wall is
penetrated; may cause victim to gasp for breath; may cause
sucking sound; may create bloody froth as air escapes the
chest.
(a) Immediately seal wound with hand or airtight material.
(b) Tape airtight material over wound on 3 sides only to
allow air to escape from the wound but not to enter.
(c) Monitor breathing and check dressing.
(d) Lift untapped side of dressing as victim exhales to allow
trapped air to escape, as necessary.
(2) Flail chest. Results from blunt trauma when 3 or more
ribs are broken in 2 or more places. The flail segment is the
broken area that moves in a direction opposite to the rest of
chest during breathing.
116


--- Page 117 ---
Sucking Chest Wound Dressing
(a) Stabilize the flail segment as follows:
• Place rolled-up clothing or bulky pad over site.
• Tape pad to site
• DO NOT wrap tape around chest.
(b) Have victim keep segment still with hand pressure.
(c) Roll victim onto side of flail segment injury (as other
injuries allow).
(3) Fractured ribs.
(a) Encourage deep breathing (painful, but necessary to
prevent the possible development of pneumonia).
117


--- Page 118 ---
(b) DO NOT constrict breathing by taping ribs.
e. Treat fractures, sprains, and dislocations.
(1) Control bleeding.
(2) Remove watches, jewelry, and constrictive clothing.
(3) If fracture penetrates the skin—
(a) Clean wound by gentle irrigation with water.
(b) Apply dressing over wound.
(4) Position limb as normally as possible.
(5) Splint in position found (if unable to straighten limb).
(6) Improvise a splint with available materials:
(a) Sticks or straight, stiff materials from equipment.
(b) Body parts (for example, opposite leg, arm-to-chest).
(7) Attach with strips of cloth, parachute cord, etc.
(8) Keep the fractured bones from moving by immobilizing
the joints on both sides of the fracture. If fracture is in a joint,
immobilize the bones on both sides of the joint.
CAUTION: Splint fingers in a slightly flexed position, NOT
in straight position. Hand should look like it is grasping an
apple.
118


--- Page 119 ---
(9) Use RICES treatment for 72 hours.
(a) Rest.
(b) Ice.
(c) Compression.
(d) Elevation.
(e) Stabilization.
(10) Apply cold to acute injuries.
(11) Use 15 to 20 minute periods of cold application.
(a) DO NOT use continuous cold therapy.
(b) Repeat 3 to 4 times per day.
(c) Avoid cooling that can cause frostbite or hypothermia.
(12) Wrap with a compression bandage after cold therapy.
(13) Elevate injured area above heart level to reduce swelling.
(14) Check periodically for a pulse beyond the injury site.
(15) Loosen bandage or reapply splint if no pulse is felt or if
swelling occurs because bandage is too tight.
2. COMMON INJURIES AND ILLNESSES
a. Burns.
119


--- Page 120 ---
(1) Cool the burned area with water.
(a) Use immersion or cool compresses.
(b) Avoid aggressive cooling with ice or frigid water.
(2) Remove watches, jewelry, constrictive clothing.
(3) DO NOT remove embedded, charred material that will
cause burned areas to bleed.
(4) Cover with sterile dressings.
(5) DO NOT use lotion or grease.
(6) Avoid moving or rubbing the burned part.
(7) Drink extra water to compensate for increased fluid loss
from burns. (Add ¼ teaspoon of salt [if available] to each
quart of water.)
(8) Change dressings when soaked or dirty.
b. Eye injuries.
(1) Sun/snow
blindness
(gritty,
burning
sensation,
and
possible reduction in vision caused by sun exposure).
(a) Prevent with improvised goggles.
(b) Treat by patching affected eye(s).
• Check after 12 hours.
120


--- Page 121 ---
• Replace patch for another 12 hours if not healed.
(c) Use cool compresses to reduce pain.
(2) Foreign body in eye.
(a) Irrigate with clean water from the inside to the outside
corner of the eye.
(b) If foreign body is not removed by irrigation, improvise a
small swab. Moisten and wipe gently over the affected area.
(c) If foreign body is STILL not removed, patch eye for 24
hours and then reattempt removal using steps (a) and (b).
c. Heat injury.
(1) Heat cramps (cramps in legs or abdomen).
(a) Rest.
(b) Drink water. Add ¼ teaspoon of salt per quart.
(2) Heat exhaustion (pale, sweating, moist, cool skin).
(a) Rest in shade.
(b) Drink water.
(c) Protect from further heat exposure.
(3) Heat stroke (victim disoriented or unconscious, skin is
hot and flushed [sweating may or may not occur], fast pulse).
121


--- Page 122 ---
CAUTION:
Handle
heat
stroke
victim
gently.
Shock,
seizures, and cardiac arrest can occur.
(a) Cool as rapidly as possible (saturate clothing with water
and fan the victim). Remember to cool the groin and armpit
areas. (Avoid overcooling.)
(b) Maintain airway, breathing, and circulation.
d. Cold injuries:
(1) Frostnip and frostbite—
(a) Are progressive injuries.
• Ears, nose, fingers, and toes are affected first.
• Areas will feel cold and may tingle leading to—
• • Numbness that progresses to—
••• Waxy appearance with stiff skin that cannot glide freely
over a joint.
(b) Frostnipped areas rewarm with body heat. If body heat
WILL NOT rewarm area in 15 to 20 minutes, then frostbite is
present.
(c) Frostbitten areas are deeply frozen and require medical
treatment.
122


--- Page 123 ---
CAUTION: In frostbite, repeated freezing and thawing causes
severe pain and increases damage to the tissue. DO NOT rub
frozen tissue. DO NOT thaw frozen tissue.
(2) Hypothermia—
(a) Is a progressive injury.
• Intense shivering with impaired ability to perform complex
tasks leads to—
• • Violent shivering, difficulty speaking, sluggish thinking go
to—
••• Muscular rigidity with blue, puffy skin; jerky movements
go to—
•••• Coma, respiratory and cardiac failure.
(b) Protect victim from the environment as follows:
• Remove wet clothing.
• Put on dry clothing (if available).
• Prevent further heat loss.
• • Cover top of head.
• • Insulate from above and below.
• Warm with blankets, sleeping bags, or shelter.
123


--- Page 124 ---
• Warm central areas before extremities.
• • Place heat packs in groin, armpits, and around neck.
• • Avoid causing burns to skin.
CAUTION: Handle hypothermia victim gently. Avoid overly
rapid rewarming which may cause cardiac arrest. Rewarming
of victim with skin-to-skin contact by volunteer(s) inside of a
sleeping bag is a survival technique but can cause internal
temperatures of all to drop.
e. Skin tissue damage.
(1) Immersion injuries. Skin becomes wrinkled as in dishpan
hands.
(a) Avoid walking on affected feet.
(b) Pat dry; DO NOT rub. Skin tissue will be sensitive.
(c) Dry socks and shoes. Keep feet protected.
(d) Loosen boots, cuffs, etc., to improve circulation.
(e) Keep area dry, warm, and open to air.
(f) DO NOT apply creams or ointments.
(2) Saltwater sores.
(a) Change body positions frequently.
124


--- Page 125 ---
(b) Keep sores dry.
(c) Use antiseptic (if available).
(d) DO NOT open or squeeze sores.
f. Snakebite.
CAUTION: This snakebite treatment recommendation is for
situations where medical aid and specialized equipment are
not available.
(1) Nonpoisonous. Clean and bandage wound.
(2) Poisonous.
(a) Remove constricting items.
(b) Minimize activity.
(c) DO NOT cut the bite site; DO NOT use your mouth to
create suction.
(d) Clean bite with soap and water; cover with a dressing.
(e) Overwrap the bite site with a tight (elastic) bandage
(Figure V-6). The intent is to slow capillary and venous blood
flow but not arterial flow. Check for pulse below the
overwrap.
(f) Splint bitten extremity to prevent motion.
(g) Treat for shock.
125


--- Page 126 ---
(h) Position extremity below level of heart.
(i) Construct shelter if necessary (let the victim rest).
(j) For conscious victims, force fluids.
g. Marine life.
(1) Stings.
(a) Flush wound with salt water (fresh water stimulates toxin
release).
(b) Remove jewelry and watches.
(c) Remove tentacles and gently scrape or shave skin.
(d) Apply a steroid cream (if available).
(e) DO NOT rub area with sand.
(f) Treat for shock; artificial respiration may be required.
(g) DO NOT use urine to flush or treat wounds.
(2) Punctures.
(a) Immerse affected part in hot water or apply hot
compresses for 30-60 minutes (as hot as victim can tolerate).
(b) Cover with clean dressing.
(c) Treat for shock as needed.
126


--- Page 127 ---
h. Skin irritants (includes poison oak and poison ivy).
(1) Wash with large amounts of water. Use soap (if
available).
(2) Keep covered to prevent scratching,
i. Infection.
(1) Keep wound clean.
(2) Use iodine tablet solution or diluted betadine to prevent
or treat infection.
(3) Change bandages as needed.
j. Dysentery and diarrhea.
(1) Drink extra water.
(2) Use a liquid diet.
(3) Eat charcoal. Make a paste by mixing fine charcoal
particles with water. (It may relieve symptoms by absorbing
toxins.)
k. Constipation (can be expected in survival situations).
(1) DO NOT take laxatives.
(2) Exercise.
(3) Drink extra water.
127


--- Page 128 ---
Compression Bandage for Snake Bite
3. PLANT MEDICINE
a. Tannin.
128


--- Page 129 ---
(1) Medical uses. Burns, diarrhea, dysentery, skin problems,
and parasites. Tannin solution prevents infection and aids
healing.
(2) Sources. Found in the outer bark of all trees, acorns,
banana plants, common plantain, strawberry leaves, and
blackberry stems.
(3) Preparation.
(a) Place crushed outer bark, acorns, or leaves in water.
(b) Leach out the tannin by soaking or boiling.
• Increase tannin content by longer soaking time.
• Replace depleted material with fresh bark/plants.
(4) Treatments.
(a) Burns.
• Moisten bandage with cooled tannin tea.
• Apply compress to burned area.
• Pour cooled tea on burned areas to ease pain.
(b) Diarrhea, dysentery, and worms. Drink strong tea
solution (may promote voiding of worms).
129


--- Page 130 ---
(c) Skin problems (dry rashes and fungal infections). Apply
cool compresses or soak affected part to relieve itching and
promote healing.
(d) Lice and insect bites. Wash affected areas with tea to
ease itching.
b. Salicin/salicylic acid.
(1) Medical uses. Aches, colds, fever, inflammation, pain,
sprains, and sore throat (aspirin-like qualities).
(2) Sources. Willow and aspen trees.
(3) Preparation.
(a) Gather twigs, buds, or cambium layer (soft, moist layer
between the outer bark and the wood) of willow or aspen.
(b) Prepare tea.
(c) Make poultice.
• Crush the plant or stems.
• Make a pulpy mass.
(4) Treatments.
(a) Chew on twigs, buds, or cambium for symptom relief.
(b) Drink tea for colds and sore throat.
130


--- Page 131 ---
(c) Use warm, moist poultice for aches and sprains.
• Apply pulpy mass over injury.
• Hold in place with a dressing.
c. Common plantain
(1) Medical
uses.
Itching,
wounds,
abrasions,
stings,
diarrhea, and dysentery.
(2) Source. There are over 200 plantain species with similar
medicinal properties.
(3) Preparation.
(a) Brew tea from seeds.
(b) Brew tea from leaves.
(c) Make poultice of leaves.
(4) Treatments.
(a) Drink tea made from seeds for diarrhea or dysentery.
(b) Drink tea made from leaves for vitamin and minerals.
(c) Use poultice to treat cuts, sores, burns, and stings.
d. Papain.
(1) Medical uses. Digestive aid, meat tenderizer, and a food
source.
131


--- Page 132 ---
(2) Source. Fruit of the papaya tree.
(3) Preparation.
(a) Make cuts in unripe fruit.
(b) Gather milky white sap for its papain content.
(c) Avoid getting sap in eyes or wounds.
(4) Treatments.
(a) Use sap to tenderize tough meat.
(b) Eat ripe fruit for food, vitamins, and minerals.
e. Common Cattail.
(1) Medical uses. Wounds, sores, boils, inflammations,
burns, and an excellent food source.
(2) Source. Cattail plant found in marshes.
(3) Preparation.
(a) Pound roots into a pulpy mass for a poultice.
(b) Cook and eat green bloom spikes.
(c) Collect yellow pollen for flour substitute.
(d) Peel and eat tender shoots (raw or cooked).
(4) Treatments.
132


--- Page 133 ---
(a) Apply poultice to affected area.
(b) Use plant for food, vitamins, and minerals.
Useful Plants
4. HEALTH AND HYGIENE
a. Stay clean (daily regimen).
(1) Minimize infection by washing. (Use white ashes, sand,
or loamy soil as soap substitutes.)
(2) Comb and clean debris from hair.
(3) Cleanse mouth and brush teeth.
(a) Use hardwood twig as toothbrush (fray it by chewing on
one end then use as brush).
133


--- Page 134 ---
(b) Use single strand of an inner core string from parachute
cord for dental floss.
(c) Use clean finger to stimulate gum tissues by rubbing.
(d) Gargle with salt water to help prevent sore throat and aid
in cleaning teeth and gums.
(4) Clean and protect feet.
(a) Change and wash socks
(b) Wash, dry, and massage.
(c) Check frequently for blisters and red areas.
(d) Use adhesive tape/mole skin to prevent damage.
b. Exercise daily.
c. Prevent and control parasites.
(1) Check body for lice, fleas, ticks, etc.
(a) Check body regularly.
(b) Pick off insects and eggs (DO NOT crush).
(2) Wash clothing and use repellents.
(3) Use smoke to fumigate clothing and equipment.
5. RULES FOR AVOIDING ILLNESS
134


--- Page 135 ---
a. Purify all water obtained from natural sources by using
iodine tablets, bleach, or boiling for 5 minutes.
b. Locate latrines 200 feet from water and away from
shelter.
c. Wash hands before preparing food or water.
d. Clean all eating utensils after each meal.
e. Prevent insect bites by using repellent, netting, and
clothing.
f. Dry wet clothing as soon as possible.
g. Eat varied diet.
h. Try to get 7-8 hours sleep per day.
135


--- Page 136 ---
CHAPTER 10
SURVIVAL SHELTERS
A careful assessment of the survival situation in which you
find yourself will make it possible to decide on an order of
priorities. One of the key decisions you will have to make is
where the need for shelter lies within that order. In most
survival situations finding shelter will be a matter of urgency.
Even in a temperate part of the world it will usually be a need
that you cannot afford to overlook.
The most dangerous weather conditions include cold, wind,
rain and snow. It is essential to protect yourself against these,
as
each
of
them
is
a
factor
which
brings
about
hypothermia—a drop in the body temperature below the
normal level. Exposure to one or any combination of these
conditions can rapidly produce deadly results long before any
shortage of food or water would take effect. Conversely, even
in warm summer weather or hot climates, shelter from the sun
is needed in order to avoid overheating of the body.
Prolonged exposure to high temperatures may not affect the
survivor as quickly as loss of body heat, but it can still have
fatal consequences by causing a very rapid loss of body
fluids.
CHOOSING A SITE
There may be temporary shelter to be found among the
natural features immediately surrounding you or nearby. Seek
it in or near trees, thick bushes or natural hollows. If on close
inspection they seem safe, make use of caves, rock overhangs
136


--- Page 137 ---
or any stable form of natural shelter. Never waste precious
time
and
energy
constructing
a
temporary
shelter
or
wind-break if nature already provides it.
The climate and the terrain, along with your personal
circumstances—for example, whether you are alone or in a
group, the physical condition you are in, and the construction
materials and tools you have at your disposal—will to a large
extent determine the siting of a shelter and the form it takes.
But there are some general points worth keeping in mind
when considering the task of building a shelter.
Find cover as quickly as possible. Take into account your
state of health and any construction tools available. The most
important considerations are insulation from the ground and
protection from the weather. Don’t attempt to build anything
too complicated until you have the time.
137


--- Page 138 ---
A natural shelter, such as this fallen tree, can be easily
improved with logs acting as a windbreak. It is most
important to settle on your shelter before the cover of
darkness or exhaustion sets in.
If possible, choose the site that provides the most natural
cover from the wind that you can find. If no site offering such
protection is available, angle the shelter so that its entrance or
open side is always facing away from the wind. Oddly
enough, a hillside is usually warmer than a valley floor, even
though it may be windier. Build the shelter as near as possible
to a supply of fresh water, to sources of building materials
and, very important, firewood. Any spot that is in a forest and
near a fast-flowing stream can provide a site for a desirable, if
temporary, residence. In lowlands be aware of the danger of
floods. On the coast keep the tides in mind. In mountainous
areas make sure that your prospective site does not lie in the
path of possible avalanches or rockfalls. If you are in a forest,
look around for fallen trees, which may indicate that it is an
area of shallow soil. If the wind can blow one shallowly
rooted tree over, it could do the same to others near you. For
the same reason, isolated single trees are best avoided. On the
other hand, the branches of an isolated tree which has already
138


--- Page 139 ---
fallen may well provide a ready-made framework for a sound
shelter.
Tuck yourself into a fallen fir tree. It may be damp, but you
can increase your comfort by building a fire.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
In survival situations where a ready-made natural shelter is
not available, the shelter is usually constructed from a
combination of materials possessed by the survivor and
natural materials found at or near the site. Probably the most
useful example of the former is any type of sheeting. A
groundsheet, plastic sheeting and sacks, canvas and blankets
can all be used to provide a windproof shelter. Among the
most commonly used natural materials are:
Groundsheet
139


--- Page 140 ---
Sacks
Turf Turf can be used for constructing a shelter in very flat,
open areas where trees and shrubs are scarce. Indeed in many
countries it is still used as an effective roofing material.
Turf
Foliage With foliage it is possible to construct an excellent,
long-lasting
waterproof
shelter.
If
it
is
available,
use
large-leafed foliage.
Foliage
Stones Where the ground is too hard to dig a shelter, or
foliage is in very short supply, it is usually possible, though
140


--- Page 141 ---
more time-consuming, to build a good shelter with large,
flattish stones.
Stones
TERRAIN AND SHELTERS
Different types of terrain provide different features and
materials for use in creating a shelter. The most commonly
encountered types of terrain and the materials they furnish are
examined below.
FOREST
In any forested area there may be large fallen logs to be used.
A trough dug between such logs, covered with a roof of
branches and foliage, provides a shelter which requires little
effort to construct. A single log can be supplemented with a
low earth wall or used as the basis of a small lean-to.
The lean-to frame is the most commonly used shelter
pattern-probably because it is among the simplest. When
setting up the frame, make sure that the roof slopes down into
the prevailing wind. The covering can be provided by a wide
range of materials, from foliage to plastic sheeting, from a
groundsheet to panels from a wrecked vehicle or aircraft.
Even blocks of turf can be used. A firm mud or turf layer,
when placed on top of foliage, will harden, prevent the shelter
cover from being blown away and make it more windproof
141


--- Page 142 ---
and waterproof. The sides of the shelter can either be filled in
by using a similar combination of foliage and mud or turf, or
they can be built up with blocks of turf.
One of the best shelters to build is a simple lean-to. Note the
wind direction and then site your frame accordingly, using
available branches to construct it. Cover the frame with
foliage thick enough to stop the wind and rain, and then cover
the sides to give extra protection.
LAYERED TREE BIVOUAC
A small bivouac-like shelter can be made quite quickly from
any small tree. Cut partially through the trunk at about
shoulder height until you are able to push the upper part over
so that its top rests on the ground. Do not detach this upper
portion from the lower. Cut away the branches on its
underside and break the upstanding branches on the outside
so that they hang down. Thatch the shelter using the foliage
cut from the underside.
142


--- Page 143 ---
If the survivor has a supply of usable cord or string, a
variation of the lean-to can be built that is especially suitable
in any area covered with short, bushy vegetation. Cut four or
five stakes of the greatest length available. Force their ends
into the ground, then bend the tops over and tie them down at
an angle of 45 degrees. It may be possible to find a spot
where two or three can be incorporated into the framework of
the shelter without being cut-that is, they can left rooted in the
ground. This will ensure that the shelter has much greater
stability.
PARACHUTE TENT
If you are lucky enough to have a parachute it is a simple
matter to fashion a bell-tent from it. Parachute material is
wind-resistant, and shower-proof as long as it is not touched,
but it does not offer protection against heavy rain. First
remove all the valuable paracord rigging lines. Tie a good
length of cord to the centre of the parachute canopy. Tie a
suitable log or stone to the other end and lob the cord over a
convenient tree branch. Pull the parachute to its full height
and secure the cord to the trunk. It is then a simple matter of
pulling out the parachute skirt and pegging it in a circle. The
tent can be improved by cutting one side of a panel to form a
door-on the lee side. A stove suitable for use inside this kind
of shelter is the Yukon stove.
143


--- Page 144 ---
Twigs and branches can be tightly interwoven to provide a
firm, hard frame. More foliage is then added until a complete
covering is formed. A layer of light turf or mud will complete
the roof.
PLAINS AND GRASSLANDS
If you find yourself in an area which is covered with grass but
where trees are either scarce or completely absent, it is
possible to cut turf bricks and build an effective shelter.
Making the roof will be easiest if you can find any small
sticks or boughs to support a turf roof. An alternative form of
roof is any kind of sheeting which can be anchored by the top
row of turf bricks. If nothing but turf is at hand, make the
shelter small and narrow enough for longer turf strips to be
used in pairs, supporting each other, for the walls.
If the grass is long enough, bundles might be suitable to make
a thatched roof for the shelter, but in this case try to pitch the
roof as near to 45 degrees as practicable to provide a run-off
for any water.
If the ground is suitable-that is, soft but not wet-it may be
possible to combine the effort of digging or cutting the turf
with building a low wall along the edge of the slit trench
produced in the process.
144


--- Page 145 ---
Before bricks, most houses were constructed with a timber
frame supporting wattle and daub—a lattice-work of sticks
caked with mud. The same method can be used to build
shelters on plains and grasslands.
In areas of short bush, a willow shelter can be made by
overlapping saplings to form a frame. This can be covered
with a shelter sheet, plastic sacking or a parachute.
Turf blocks make a wet but windproof shelter. Insulate the
ground as well as possible, since it will inevitably fill with a
little water (below).
145


--- Page 146 ---
The effective height of the windbreak is then increased for
about the same amount of effort. It is essential to make sure,
however, that any rain will drain away from the trench and
not into it.
Making a shelter below ground level can also be very helpful
in hot conditions, although when the weather is hot the
hardness of the ground frequently makes this difficult.
All these shelters, and especially the lean-to varieties, can be
improved by the addition of a fire and fire reflector. The fire
is best set on a base of green logs, while the reflector is made
of interwoven green sticks. Large stones stacked around the
back of the fire will also reflect heat. The hot stones can be
taken into the shelter at night. With care these can be placed
beneath your bed space, where they will continue to emit
warmth during the night.
SNOW
There are several types of shelter that are used specifically in
snow-covered terrain. However, some of them suffer from
significant drawbacks. One type may demand too much time
and energy in its construction, especially for a solitary
survivor. Another might require a greater depth of snow than
is available. Alternatively, very cold, hard-packed snow may
not be available for the cutting of snow blocks.
SURVIVAL TIP
Constructing a snow hole requires a great deal of effort, but
you can make it easier by removing the undergarments from
the top half of your body and tunneling into the snow with
146


--- Page 147 ---
waterproofs covering both the top and bottom half. Put the
dry under-garments back on when the hole is complete.
SNOW TRENCH
Even a hole in the snow provides temporary shelter as an
emergency measure, and it can be improved to make a simple
shelter for one man. If the snow is soft, branches or sheeting
will be needed for the roof.
At the very least a snow trench will protect you from the
wind. But with small refinements, such as pine branches for
insulation, and a candle, it provides a good night’s sleep.
FIR-TREE SHELTER
If in a wooded snow-covered area, by far the most convenient
and simplest shelter is to be found under a large fir tree. There
will in many cases be a natural hollow in the snow around the
trunk of the tree and this will give you a good starting-point
for building the shelter. First dig away the snow from the base
of the tree and use it to build up and improve protection from
the weather either side of the shelter. Cut the low branches on
the side away from the shelter to use as bedding or to
147


--- Page 148 ---
interweave with the branches on your side to improve the
overhead cover. You can build a fire under the tree, but make
sure it is at least part of the way around the trunk from your
shelter, to stop it melting snow overhead.
A simple snow cave, as illustrated above, can be easily
excavated
and
offers
snug
and
secure
overnight
accommodation. (1) The entrance porch is dug out first, by
removing snow in a vertical trough from a deep and
well-drifted snow bank. (2) Continue digging out a T-shaped
hole to a depth of about a metre (3ft). The upper part of this
shape will form the sleeping area. (3) Carry on excavating the
horizontal sleeping area a further metre (3ft) beyond the end
of the vertical entrance. Any snow removed can be used to
148


--- Page 149 ---
build up walls around the porch that will give added
protection from the wind. (4) Cut snow blocks large enough
to fill the front of the SURVIVAL SHELTERS sleeping area.
(5) Leave gaps between the blocks for ventilation. (6) Crawl
in and upwards onto the sleeping area. Dig upwards to create
a domed roof and leave the entrance well open for further
ventilation. If the wind is too strong the well can be closed
with a rucksack.
SNOW CAVE
This type of shelter requires a depth of snow of 2 metres (6.5
feet) or more, and so it is appropriate in very cold regions
where the snow level builds up for long periods. The simplest
approach is to dig into a snow drift or cornice. To improve the
snow cave, aim to incorporate as many of the features shown
in the cross-section above as you can. Make sure that the
inside roof is always dome-shaped, or you will wake up in the
morning with it on your head.
In snow-covered woods, large fir trees make an excellent
natural hollow in the snow. This can be insulated from the
149


--- Page 150 ---
ground by cutting away some of the lower branches, at the
same time creating soft bedding. Always make your fire on
the other side of the tree.
A raised platform inside a snow shelter stops the coldest
air-which sinks-from getting in. A second channel is needed
for ventilation.
Note that sometimes this type of shelter is considerably more
difficult to make than it might seem, because of the hardness
of the packed snow. In fact, without tools other than your
hands and feet it may prove impossible.
SNOW IGLOO
If the plan is to remain in one location for more than a day or
two an igloo built of snow blocks will provide a good refuge
for
two
or
more
survivors.
It
requires
tools
for
its
construction-an axe, a knife, and a saw or a spade. It also
takes time and effort, as well as care and thought in placing
the blocks. However, the combined efforts of two or three
people will reduce the difficulty considerably. The blocks
must be cut from cold, heavily compacted snow-no other type
of snow is suitable. Build up from the base, gradually
150


--- Page 151 ---
working towards a point above the middle of the igloo, so that
the blocks eventually join overhead.
Igloo
The secret of building a good igloo is to angle the lowest
layer of blocks so that walls slope inward.
An alternative method of constructing an igloo is to stamp
down an area in the snow and build up a mound of packed
snow, then simply tunnel into the mound. This method of
construction has the advantage of being quick to construct,
and is easier for the novice or the lone survivor.
Take care to lay out the entrance tunnel on the lee side of the
shelter. In any snow shelter, build your bed on a raised
platform, so as to avoid the coldest air, which will gather at
the lowest level.
151


--- Page 152 ---
Where the snow is too shallow to build an igloo, a snow hive
can be made.
(1) Pack snow on to a dome of branches covered with a sheet.
(2) Once the layer of snow is about 1ft (30cm) thick, carefully
remove the branches and the sheet from the core.
(3) Use your rucksack or something similarly bulky to block
up the entrance once you are inside the hive. Remember to
leave a small gap in order to allow ventilation.
(4) This provides a surprisingly strong night shelter. On two
occasions I have built hives and they can stand for seven
days, so it is worth taking time to construct a large one.
152


--- Page 153 ---
(1) For survival shelter in long-term desert conditions, but
where a building material is available, construct yourself a
makeshift shelter by digging into a sand-dune.
(2) Sand has a habit of drifting and finding its way into every
crevice. This can be minimized by using any wood and
153


--- Page 154 ---
vehicle and aircraft parts you can find to form the basis of
your shelter.
(3) The shelter should be covered, if at all possible, to protect
you from the wind, sun and night-time
cold—a
real
possibility under the cloudless skies of a desert.
As soon as you have constructed your igloo, place a lit candle
in the centre. You will be surprised by the warmth generated
by so little a flame.
DESERT AND ROCKY AREAS
The task of obtaining any form of shelter in desert areas
presents several difficulties. However, the possibilities should
be given some thought-not least because roughly one-fifth of
the earth’s surface falls into this category and survival
situations frequently arise in such terrain.
The first difficulty is that deserts are places of extreme
conditions-extreme heat during the day and biting cold at
night. They also vary greatly in their composition, consisting
of rock, sand or salt, or any combination of these. Some
deserts
are
plains,
others
mountainous,
still
others
depressions. Some are totally barren, others have scanty
vegetation, while some have a variety of plants. All these
variations can occur in combinations which make desert
shelter difficult to achieve if you are entirely without material
resource.
THE SANGAR
154


--- Page 155 ---
A fortified combat position named after the Persian word for
stone, a sangar is one of the earliest forms of man-made
shelter. In the context of survival it is simply a windbreak
built of any materials available-stones, branches, snow, parts
from wrecked vehicle or aircraft, or indeed anything else that
is suitable. In the absence of any better alternative, the sangar
at least has the benefit of reducing exposure to the chilling
effects of the wind. Use a survival blanket, poncho or plastic
sheet as a roof to give shade by day and as a blanket at night,
unless it is needed for protection against rain or snow.
A sangar is nothing more than a circle of stones. In the
Middle East it provides protection against wild animals as
well as the sun. An inner framework, supporting a sheet roof,
much improves it.
155


--- Page 156 ---
If two forms of sheeting are available it is best to make a
layered roof, leaving a 2–3in (5–7cm) gap. This allows air to
circulate and drastically reduces the temperature.
SURVIVAL TIP
In jungle conditions there is usually an abundance of
troublesome and unpleasant insects—on the ground. This
means that a good basis for any shelter would be a raised
platform. Even if your resources do not make it possible to
build a platform big enough to support the entire shelter, it is
very important to avoid sleeping directly on the jungle floor.
Shelter from the sun and heat is the main aim when in the
desert. Use a groundsheet (or any alternative) to cover a
depression scooped out of the ground. This is known as a
“scrape.” If there are any rocks or vegetation, drape the sheet
over the rocks or plants. If you have no material help, look for
shade or shelter from natural desert features-rocks, rock
cairns, caves or ledges. Dry stream beds may offer shelter.
These wadi banks, or the sides of ravines or valleys, are worth
looking over for crevices or caves.
LONG-TERM DESERT SHELTER
Dig into the lee side of a dune, and make a roof from any
material available. (A life-raft from a crashed aircraft is ideal.
Use the paddles to support the inflated raft.) Cover the whole
structure with any cloth or plastic material to prevent sand
infiltrating it. If it is necessary, camouflage the whole shelter
with sand, as this will not only aid concealment but will help
to keep you cool during the day and warm during the night.
156


--- Page 157 ---
In mountainous desert areas, there is usually a good supply of
caves. Always ensure that your selected cave is unoccupied.
Form your fire at the deepest point and block the entrance
against the wind and wild animals. Conditions can be made
more tolerable by using soft sand from a valley floor to form
a comfortable bed on rocky ground.
Whichever type of desert shelter you set out to build,
remember that your aim is to protect yourself against those
aspects of the environment which can threaten your safety. In
any area with a hot climate, insects are likely to be a problem.
You can gain some protection against the winged species if
you are able to erect your shelter on a site which receives
some breeze—for example, on a hillside or ridge, or in a
location which receives an onshore wind.
SURVIVAL TIP
The jungle survivor must learn to work with the jungle, and
not fight against it. And remember that, when you are wet,
157


--- Page 158 ---
cold and perhaps miserable, every hour spent building your
shelter and your fire is worth many hours’ sleep.
JUNGLE
In the jungle, the survivor should never be short of materials
for building a shelter. All such items are likely to be close at
hand, but you would do well to select the site for your shelter
with care. These are the main factors that will influence your
choice:
• The presence of nearby food and water.
• Stable ground away from swamp or infected areas.
• Protection from danger, such as rotting or falling trees and
wild animals.
Foliage for shelters is easily found in any jungle. Normally
just a small portion of one plant will be ample to cover your
frame; it also makes excellent bedding.
BAMBOO
158


--- Page 159 ---
Bamboo (atap) is one of the most commonly used building
materials in survival in the jungle, but gathering it can be
hazardous. Care should be taken when cutting bamboo as it
grows very densely and in some growths sections are under
strain. It is not uncommon for a cut section to suddenly shoot
forward and hit you with some force. Bear in mind as well
that bamboo is very sharp.
An A-frame pole bed is usually supported by two larger trees.
The tension in the bed—which can be made from plastic feed
sacks—holds the bedding poles in place.
Despite these drawbacks, bamboo is a wonderful material and
with the aid of a good jungle knife, you can construct many
useful survival items, including the shelter itself, a pole bed,
cooking and drinking utensils, and even a serviceable raft.
Vines are normally plentiful and only require pulling down
from their branches, but again care should be exercised.
Always look up first.
POLE BED
Build your bed first and then construct your shelter over it. A
pole bed of bamboo or any small branches covered with palm
159


--- Page 160 ---
leaves or other foliage is a real necessity. If any sizeable
suitable material is available then you should use that for the
base.
HAMMOCK
You can make a hammock if you have a parachute, since this
will provide almost the ideal materials. However, do not
attempt to make one out of vines since they normally break.
A perfect combination for a shelter in a warm climate is either
a bed or hammock slung beneath a poncho or shelter sheet.
Providing it does not become too cold, it is possible to live
comfortably
for
many
months
underneath
such
an
arrangement.
160


--- Page 161 ---
There is an old saying that the jungle is neutral. It will quickly
provide you with good shelter, food, and water. If you intend
to stay put for some time, make the effort to construct as good
a camp as you can.
JUNGLE SHELTER
If you intend to stay put for a while in the jungle, it is fairly
easy to construct a very comfortable dwelling in a short
period of time. However, as always, it is best to plan your
shelter carefully. The major point to consider is where to
position your fire. If the shelter is big enough, and there is no
possibility of it catching fire, then inside is best. During the
day the fire can be used for its normal functions, notably
161


--- Page 162 ---
cooking, while at dusk and during the night it can be used to
fend off insects. A good idea is to burn a termites’ nest if you
can find one, since this will produce a great quantity of smoke
which will keep the flying bugs away. However, bear in mind
that it is not always clear which is the most evil of the two:
the smoke or the mosquitoes. Spreading old ash around your
bedding area and the shelter site will also help reduce the
amount of crawling companions that gather during the night.
Almost the biggest menace when you are in the jungle is not
large animals, but insects. It is essential to sleep on a raised
platform. Burning a termite nest keeps flies at bay—but the
smoke can be almost as irritating. A layer of mud stops biting
insects and can be washed off in the morning.
162


--- Page 163 ---
Use broad leaves to cover a jungle shelter. Large branches can
be split and woven into a frame of saplings. Experiment with
whatever cover is available in the vicinity.
163


--- Page 164 ---
CHAPTER 11
SURVIVAL KITS
Survival kits must be matched to the environment in which
you are most likely to find yourself. A home survival kit can
easily contain power generators, fuel and food for weeks,
robust medical supplies, communications equipment, and
large quantities of water. When you are headed into a
wilderness area or have the potential to be stranded in such an
area, you will have to choose your items with more discretion
and design a kit that you can carry for prolonged periods that
will still provide you with those items you decide are critical
to your survival.
From the previous chapters you should already have an idea
of what items are most critical to any survival situation, such
as a knife, map, compass, and items for making a fire. While
many people quickly think of a firearm, you will note that
scant attention has been given to that item. Remember that a
basic tenant of any survival kit is selecting items that are
multipurpose. Firearms are only good for killing game and
signaling. Their cost is in their bulk and weight. In turn, a
knife and hatchet or small ax will serve many purposes and
not be dependant on ammunition. If you feel it is essential to
have a firearm, choose one that is lightweight and uses light
ammunition such as .22 cal, which will allow you to carry
more rounds for the same weight and is fully sufficient for
small game. Remember that small animals are more plentiful
than large ones and dangerous animals should be avoided all
together.
164


--- Page 165 ---
While the list of items you might include in your survival kit
is huge and in many cases depends on personal preference,
recommended kits for cold climates, hot climates, and water
survival are listed below. These recommended kits are
followed by a larger listing of items that you may consider for
your own survival kit. While these recommended items in no
way provide a comprehensive list of the items you can choose
from, they do provide a basis from which you can select items
for a basic kit.
• Food packets
• Snare wire
• Illumination flares
• Waterproof match box
• Saw/knife blade
• Wood matches
• First aid kit
• Magnetic compass
• Pocket knife
• Saw-knife-shovel handle
• Frying pan
• Illuminating candles
165


--- Page 166 ---
• Compressed trioxane fuel
• Signaling mirror
• Survival fishing kit
• Plastic spoon
• Survival manual
• Poncho
• Insect headnet
• Shovel
• Water bag
• Sleeping bag
Cold Climate Kit
• Canned drinking water
• Waterproof matchbox
• Plastic whistle
• Illumination flares
• Pocket knife
• Signaling mirror
166


--- Page 167 ---
• Plastic water bag
• First aid kit
• Sunburn-preventive cream
• Plastic spoon
• Food packets
• Compressed trioxane fuel
• Fishing tackle kit
• Magnetic compass
• Snare wire
• Frying pan
• Wood matches
• Insect headnet
• Reversible sun hat
• Tarpaulin
• Survival manual
Hot Climate Kit
• Raft boat paddle
167


--- Page 168 ---
• Survival manual
• Insect headnet
• Reversible sun hat
• Water storage bag
• Magnetic compass
• Boat bailer
• Sponge
• Sunburn-preventive cream
• Wood matches
• First aid kit
• Plastic spoon
• Plastic knife
• Food packets
• Fluorescent sea marker
• Frying pan
• Seawater desalter kit
• Compressed trioxane fuel
168


--- Page 169 ---
• Illumination flares
• Signaling mirror
• Fishing tackle box
• Waterproof match box
• Raft repair kit
Overwater Kit
• Hunting knife with a 5-in. blade, leather handle, and sheath
• Pocket knife with one 3-1/16 in. lg cutting blade, & one
1-25/32 in. lg hook blade, w/safety lock & clevis
• Emergency signaling mirror
• Signal kit, with flares or rocket launcher
• Medical kit in a self contained carrying bag with insect
repellent & sun screen ointment
• 1 bar soap,
• Adhesive tape surgical
• Aspirin tablets
• Band-Aids
• Bandage gauze, elastic: white, sterile, 2 in. w, 180 in. lg
169


--- Page 170 ---
• Disinfectant ointment
• Water purification tablets, or filtration device
• Plastic whistle, ball
Other Items
170


--- Page 171 ---
CHAPTER 12
EDIBLE/MEDICINAL PLANTS
In a survival situation, plants can provide food and medicine.
Their safe usage requires absolutely positive identification,
knowing how to prepare them for eating, and knowing any
dangerous properties they might have. Familiarity with
botanical structures of plants and information on where they
grow will make them easier to locate and identify.
AGAVE
Agave species
DESCRIPTION: These plants have large clusters of thick,
fleshy leaves borne close to the ground and surrounding a
central stalk. The plants flower only once, then die. They
produce a massive flower stalk.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Agaves prefer dry, open
areas. They are found throughout Central America, the
171


--- Page 172 ---
Caribbean, and parts of the western deserts of the United
States and Mexico.
EDIBLE PARTS: Its flowers and flower buds are edible. Boil
them before eating.
CAUTION
The juice of some species causes dermatitis in some
individuals.
OTHER USES: Cut the huge flower stalk and collect the juice
for drinking. Some species have very fibrous leaves. Pound
the leaves and remove the fibers for weaving and making
ropes. Most species have thick, sharp needles at the tips of the
leaves. Use them for sewing or making hacks. The sap of
some species contains a chemical that makes the sap suitable
for use as a soap.
COURTESY OF WIBOWO DJATMIKO
ARROWROOT
172


--- Page 173 ---
Maranta and Sagittaria species
DESCRIPTION: The arrowroot is an aquatic plant with
arrow-shaped leaves and potato-like tubers in the mud.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Arrowroot is found
worldwide in temperate zones and the tropics. It is found in
moist to wet habitats.
EDIBLE PARTS: The rootstock is a rich source of high
quality starch. Boil the rootstock and eat it as a vegetable.
BAMBOO
Various
species
including
Bambusa,
Dendrocalamus,
Phyllostachys
DESCRIPTION: Bamboos are woody grasses that grow up to
15 meters tall. The leaves are grass-like and the stems are the
familiar bamboo used in furniture and fishing poles.
173


--- Page 174 ---
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Look for bamboo in
warm, moist regions in open or jungle country, in lowland, or
on mountains. Bamboos are native to the Far East (Temperate
and Tropical zones) but have been widely planted around the
world.
EDIBLE PARTS: The young shoots of almost all species are
edible raw or cooked. Raw shoots have a slightly bitter taste
that is removed by boiling. To prepare, remove the tough
protective sheath that is coated with tawny or red hairs. The
seed grain of the flowering bamboo is also edible. Boil the
seeds like rice or pulverize them, mix with water, and make
into cakes.
OTHER USES: Use the mature bamboo to build structures or
to make containers, ladles, spoons, and various other cooking
utensils. Also use bamboo to make tools and weapons. You
can make a strong bow by splitting the bamboo and putting
several pieces together.
CAUTION
Green bamboo may explode in a fire. Green bamboo has an
internal membrane you must remove before using it as a food
or water container.
174


--- Page 175 ---
BLACKBERRY, RASPBERRY, AND DEWBERRY
Rubus species
DESCRIPTION: These plants have prickly stems (canes) that
grow upward, arching back toward the ground. They have
alternate, usually compound leaves. Their fruits may be red,
black, yellow, or orange.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: These plants grow in
open, sunny areas at the margin of woods, lakes, streams, and
roads throughout temperate regions. There is also an arctic
raspberry.
EDIBLE PARTS: The fruits and peeled young shoots are
edible. Flavor varies greatly.
OTHER USES: Use the leaves to make tea. To treat diarrhea,
drink a tea made by brewing the dried root bark of the
blackberry bush.
BLUEBERRY AND HUCKLEBERRY
Vaccinium and Gaylussacia species
175


--- Page 176 ---
DESCRIPTION:
These
shrubs
vary
in
size
from
30
centimeters to 3.7 meters tall. All have alternate, simple
leaves. Their fruits may be dark blue, black, or red and have
many small seeds.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: These plants prefer open,
sunny areas. They are found throughout much of the north
temperate
regions and at higher elevations
in Central
America.
EDIBLE PARTS: Their fruits are edible raw.
CATTAIL
Typha latifolia
DESCRIPTION:
Cattails
are
grass-like
plants
with
strap-shaped leaves 1 to 5 centimeters wide and growing up to
1.8 meters tall. The male flowers are borne in a dense mass
above the female flowers. These last only a short time,
leaving the female flowers that develop into the brown cattail.
176


--- Page 177 ---
Pollen from the male flowers is often abundant and bright
yellow.
HABITAT
AND
DISTRIBUTION:
Cattails
are
found
throughout most of the world. Look for them in full sun areas
at the margins of lakes, streams, canals, rivers, and brackish
water.
EDIBLE PARTS: The young tender shoots are edible raw or
cooked. The rhizome is often very tough but is a rich source
of starch. Pound the rhizome to remove the starch and use as
a flour. The pollen is also an exceptional source of starch.
When the cattail is immature and still green, you can boil the
female portion and eat it like corn on the cob.
OTHER USES: The dried leaves are an excellent source of
weaving material you can use to make floats and rafts. The
cottony seeds make good pillow stuffing and insulation. The
fluff makes excellent tinder. Dried cattails are effective insect
repellents when burned.
CHICORY
177


--- Page 178 ---
Cichorium intybus
DESCRIPTION: This plant grows up to 1.8 meters tall. It has
leaves clustered at the base of the stem and some leaves on
the stem. The base leaves resemble those of the dandelion.
The flowers are sky blue and stay open only on sunny days.
Chicory has a milky juice.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Look for chicory in old
fields, waste areas, weedy lots, and along roads. It is a native
of Europe and Asia, but is also found in Africa and most of
North America where it grows as a weed.
EDIBLE PARTS: All parts are edible. Eat the young leaves
as a salad or boil to eat as a vegetable. Cook the roots as a
vegetable. For use as a coffee substitute, roast the roots until
they are dark brown and then pulverize them.
COURTESY OF STANLEY KAYS
CHUFA
Cyperus esculentus
178


--- Page 179 ---
DESCRIPTION: This very common plant has a triangular
stem and grass-like leaves. It grows to a height of 20 to 60
centimeters. The mature plant has a soft fur-like bloom that
extends from a whorl of leaves. Tubers 1 to 2.5 centimeters in
diameter grow at the ends of the roots.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Chufa grows in moist
sandy areas throughout the world. It is often an abundant
weed in cultivated fields.
EDIBLE PARTS: The tubers are edible raw, boiled, or baked.
You can also grind them and use them as a coffee substitute.
CRANBERRY
Vaccinium macrocarpon
DESCRIPTION:
This
plant
has
tiny
leaves
arranged
alternately. Its stem creeps along the ground. Its fruits are red
berries.
179


--- Page 180 ---
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: It only grows in open,
sunny, wet areas in the colder regions of the Northern
Hemisphere.
EDIBLE PARTS: The berries are very tart when eaten raw.
Cook in a small amount of water and add sugar, if available,
to make a jelly.
OTHER USES: Cranberries may act as a diuretic. They are
useful for treating urinary tract infections.
CROWBERRY
Empetrum nigrum
DESCRIPTION: This is a dwarf evergreen shrub with short
needlelike leaves. It has small, shiny, black berries that
remain on the bush throughout the winter.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Look for this plant in
tundra throughout arctic regions of North America and
Eurasia.
180


--- Page 181 ---
EDIBLE PARTS: The fruits are edible fresh or can be dried
for later use.
DATE PALM
Phoenix dactylifera
DESCRIPTION: The date palm is a tall, unbranched tree with
a crown of huge, compound leaves. Its fruit is yellow when
ripe.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: This tree grows in arid
semitropical regions. It is native to North Africa and the
Middle East but has been planted in the arid semitropics in
other parts of the world.
181


--- Page 182 ---
EDIBLE PARTS: Its fruit is edible fresh but is very bitter if
eaten before it is ripe. You can dry the fruits in the sun and
preserve them for a long time.
OTHER USES: The trunks provide valuable building material
in desert regions where few other treelike plants are found.
The leaves are durable and you can use them for thatching
and as weaving material. The base of the leaves resembles
coarse cloth that you can use for scrubbing and cleaning.
FIREWEED
Epilobium angustifolium
DESCRIPTION: This plant grows up to 1.8 meters tall. It has
large, showy, pink flowers and lance-shaped leaves. Its
relative, the dwarf fireweed (Epilobium latifolium), grows 30
to 60 centimeters tall.
182


--- Page 183 ---
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Tall fireweed is found in
open woods, on hillsides, on stream banks, and near seashores
in arctic regions. It is especially abundant in burned-over
areas. Dwarf fireweed is found along streams, sandbars, and
lakeshores and on alpine and arctic slopes.
EDIBLE PARTS: The leaves, stems, and flowers are edible in
the spring but become tough in summer. You can split open
the stems of old plants and eat the pith raw.
COURTESY OF A. BARRA
HACKBERRY
Celtis species
DESCRIPTION: Hackberry trees have smooth, gray bark that
often has corky warts or ridges. The tree may reach 39 meters
in height. Hackberry trees have long-pointed leaves that grow
in two rows. This tree bears small, round berries that can be
183


--- Page 184 ---
eaten when they are ripe and fall from the tree. The wood of
the hackberry is yellowish.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: This plant is widespread
in the United States, especially in and near ponds.
EDIBLE PARTS: Its berries are edible when they are ripe and
fall from the tree.
JUNIPER
Juniperus species
DESCRIPTION: Junipers, sometimes called cedars, are trees
or shrubs with very small, scale-like leaves densely crowded
around the branches. Each leaf is less than 1.2 centimeters
long. All species have a distinct aroma resembling the
well-known cedar. The berrylike cones are usually blue and
covered with a whitish wax.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Look for junipers in
open, dry, sunny areas throughout North America and
184


--- Page 185 ---
northern Europe. Some species are found in southeastern
Europe, across Asia to Japan, and in the mountains of North
Africa.
EDIBLE PARTS: The berries and twigs are edible. Eat the
berries raw or roast the seeds to use as a coffee substitute. Use
dried and crushed berries as a seasoning for meat. Gather
young twigs to make a tea.
CAUTION
Many plants may be called cedars but are not related to
junipers and may be harmful. Always look for the berrylike
structures, needle leaves, and resinous, fragrant sap to be sure
the plant you have is a juniper.
MARSH MARIGOLD
Caltha palustris
DESCRIPTION: This plant has rounded, dark green leaves
arising from a short stem. It has bright yellow flowers.
185


--- Page 186 ---
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: This plant is found in
bogs, lakes, and slow-moving streams. It is abundant in arctic
and subarctic regions and in much of the eastern region of the
northern United States.
EDIBLE PARTS: All parts are edible if boiled.
CAUTION
As with all water plants, do not eat this plant raw. Raw water
plants may carry dangerous organisms that are removed only
by cooking.
NETTLE
Urtica and Laportea species
DESCRIPTION: These plants grow several feet high. They
have small, inconspicuous flowers. Fine, hair-like bristles
cover the stems, leafstalks, and undersides of leaves. The
bristles cause a stinging sensation when they touch the skin.
186


--- Page 187 ---
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Nettles prefer moist areas
along streams or at the margins of forests. They are found
throughout North America, Central America, the Caribbean,
and northern Europe.
EDIBLE PARTS: Young shoots and leaves are edible.
Boiling the plant for 10 to 15 minutes destroys the stinging
element of the bristles. This plant is very nutritious.
OTHER USES: Mature stems have a fibrous layer that can be
divided into individual fibers and used to weave string or
twine.
OAK
Quercus species
DESCRIPTION: Oak trees have alternate leaves and acorn
fruits. There are two main groups of oaks: red and white. The
red oak group has leaves with bristles and smooth bark in the
upper part of the tree. Red oak acorns take 2 years to mature.
The white oak group has leaves without bristles and a rough
bark in the upper portion of the tree. White oak acorns mature
in 1 year.
187


--- Page 188 ---
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Oak trees are found in
many habitats throughout North America, Central America,
and parts of Europe and Asia.
EDIBLE PARTS: All parts are edible, but often contain large
quantities of bitter substances. White oak acorns usually have
a better flavor than red oak acorns. Gather and shell the
acorns. Soak red oak acorns in water for 1 to 2 days to
remove the bitter substance. You can speed up this process by
putting wood ashes in the water in which you soak the acorns.
Boil the acorns or grind them into flour and use the flour for
baking. You can use acorns that you baked until very dark as
a coffee substitute.
CAUTION
Tannic acid gives the acorns their bitter taste. Eating an
excessive amount of acorns high in tannic acid can lead to
kidney failure. Before eating acorns, leach out this chemical.
OTHER USES: Oak wood is excellent for building or
burning. Small oaks can be split and cut into long thin strips
(3 to 6 millimeters thick and 1.2 centimeters wide) used to
weave mats, baskets, or frameworks for packs, sleds,
furniture, etc. Oak bark soaked in water produces a tanning
solution used to preserve leather.
188


--- Page 189 ---
PALMETTO PALM
Sabal palmetto
DESCRIPTION: The palmetto palm is a tall, unbranched tree
with persistent leaf bases on most of the trunk. The leaves are
large, simple, and palmately lobed. Its fruits are dark blue or
black with a hard seed.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: The palmetto palm is
found throughout the coastal regions of the southeastern
United States.
EDIBLE PARTS: The fruits are edible raw. The hard seeds
may be ground into flour. The heart of the palm is a nutritious
189


--- Page 190 ---
food source at any time. Cut off the top of the tree to obtain
the palm heart.
PURSLANE
Portulaca oleracea
DESCRIPTION: This plant grows close to the ground. It is
seldom more than a few centimeters tall. Its stems and leaves
are fleshy and often tinged with red. It has paddle-shaped
leaves, 2.5 centimeters or less long, clustered at the tips of the
stems. Its flowers are yellow or pink. Its seeds are tiny and
black.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: It grows in full sun in
cultivated fields, field margins, and other weedy areas
throughout the world.
190


--- Page 191 ---
EDIBLE PARTS: All parts are edible. Wash and boil the
plants for a tasty vegetable or eat them raw. Use the seeds as a
flour substitute or eat them raw.
REED
Phragmites australis
DESCRIPTION: This tall, coarse grass grows to 3.5 meters
tall and has gray-green leaves about 4 centimeters wide. It has
large masses of brown flower branches in early summer.
These rarely produce grain and become fluffy, gray masses
late in the season.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Look for reed in any
open, wet area, especially one that has been disturbed through
dredging. Reed is found throughout the temperate regions of
both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres.
EDIBLE PARTS: All parts of the plant are edible raw or
cooked in any season. Harvest the stems as they emerge from
191


--- Page 192 ---
the soil and boil them. You can also harvest them just before
they produce flowers, then dry and beat them into flour. You
can also dig up and boil the underground stems, but they are
often tough. Seeds are edible raw or boiled, but they are
rarely found.
SORGHUM
Sorghum species
DESCRIPTION: There are many different kinds of sorghum,
all of which bear grains in heads at the top of the plants. The
grains are brown, white, red, or black. Sorghum is the main
food crop in many parts of the world.
192


--- Page 193 ---
HABITAT
AND
DISTRIBUTION:
Sorghum
is
found
worldwide, usually in warmer climates. All species are found
in open, sunny areas.
EDIBLE PARTS: The grains are edible at any stage of
development. When young, the grains are milky and edible
raw. Boil the older grains. Sorghum is a nutritious food.
OTHER USES: Use the stems of tall sorghum as building
materials.
WATER LILY
Nymphaea odorata
DESCRIPTION: These plants have large, triangular leaves
that float on the water’s surface, large, fragrant flowers that
are usually white, or red, and thick, fleshy rhizomes that grow
in the mud.
HABITAT AND DISTRIBUTION: Water lilies are found
throughout much of the temperate and subtropical regions.
193


--- Page 194 ---
EDIBLE PARTS: The flowers, seeds, and rhizomes are edible
raw or cooked. To prepare rhizomes for eating, peel off the
corky rind. Eat raw, or slice thinly, allow to dry, and then
grind into flour. Dry, parch, and grind the seeds into flour.
OTHER USES: Use the liquid resulting from boiling the
thickened root in water as a medicine for diarrhea and as a
gargle for sore throats.
194
