Document Title: Campers Survival 5 x 7.indd



--- Page 1 ---
THE
CAMPER’S


--- Page 2 ---


--- Page 3 ---
Tamsin King
THE
CAMPER’S
Skills, Hacks, First Aid Advice, 
Gear, Etiquette, and
EveRyThiNg
Know
to
You Need
About Camping
Racehorse Publishing


--- Page 4 ---
Copyright © Summersdale Publishers Ltd, 2018, 2019.
First Published by Summersdale Publishers Ltd, an imprint of
Hachette UK, 2018.
First Racehorse Publishing edition, 2019.
Text by Sophie Martin.
All Rights Reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any 
manner without the express written consent of the publisher, except 
in the case of brief excerpts in critical reviews or articles. All inquiries 
should be addressed to Racehorse Publishing, 307 West 36th Street, 
11th Floor, New York, NY 10018.
Racehorse Publishing books may be purchased in bulk at special 
discounts for sales promotion, corporate gifts, fund-raising, or 
educational purposes. Special editions can also be created to 
specifications. For details, contact the Special Sales Department, 
Skyhorse Publishing, 307 West 36th Street, 11th Floor, New York, NY 
10018 or info@skyhorsepublishing.com.
Racehorse Publishing™ is a pending trademark of Skyhorse Publishing, 
Inc.®, a Delaware corporation.
Visit our website at www.skyhorsepublishing.com.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available on file.
ISBN: 978-1-63158-409-1
E-Book ISBN: 978-1-63158-417-6
Printed in China


--- Page 5 ---
ConTents
BEFORE YOU GO....................................................6
Different types of camping......................................7
Organizing the perfect trip....................................21
Equipment and gear.............................................33
Choosing your transport.......................................65
Campground meals....................................................79
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY.........................................86
Camping etiquette and tips...................................87
First-aid advice.....................................................95
Games to play around the campfire....................107
Nature’s wonders—what to look out for..............120
Camping hacks...................................................124


--- Page 6 ---
6
beFore You gO
WHETHER YOU’RE NEW TO CAMPING 
OR YOU’VE DONE IT BEFORE, EACH 
TRIP CAN PRODUCE SURPRISES. IN 
THIS SECTION YOU’LL FIND TOP 
TIPS ON HOW TO PLAN FOR YOUR 
CAMPING TRIP, FROM DECIDING 
WHERE TO GO TO CHOOSING WHAT 
EQUIPMENT TO BUY AND WHICH 
CLOTHES TO TAKE WITH YOU. 


--- Page 7 ---
7
BEFORE YOU GO
diFfereNt tyPes 
Of caMping
Traditional camping involved the sky above, the 
grass below, and the trees in front of the intrepid 
explorer who rocked up at their secluded spot 
with the bare minimum of equipment to see 
them through to the morning. But as camping 
has become more and more popular, thankfully it 
can cater not just to the intrepid explorer but the 
cautious vacationer—and anyone in between. 
Whether you want your camping trip to be a 
glamorous affair or as gritty as the soil beneath 
your feet, you can tailor your experience to suit 
your needs. Here are just some of the different 
types of camping to try out:


--- Page 8 ---
8
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 caMpgroUnd cAmpinG 
Campgrounds are the perfect venues for families 
or couples who are equipped with either a tent or 
a camper. You can even take your furry friend as a 
lot of sites are dog-friendly! Many campgrounds 
may refuse to cater to large groups of friends, 
and bachelor and bachelorette parties, so 
always check with the campground before you 
book. Basic campgrounds comprise a section of 
land to pitch up on, and usually provide shower 
and toilet facilities. Swankier campgrounds also 
provide entertainment areas, restaurants, bars, 
and childcare. 


--- Page 9 ---
9
BEFORE YOU GO
 feStivaL camPing 
Many people’s first experience of camping is at 
a mainstream festival, where the atmosphere 
is constantly buzzing and the noise never dies 
down. This type of camping is very different 
from others, so don’t be put off from camping 
altogether if you didn’t enjoy it. If a big festival 
seems a bit daunting but you like the idea of 
attending something similar, there are tons of 
smaller-scale festivals that provide a lot more 
privacy—some even cater specifically to families.


--- Page 10 ---
10
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 glAmpinG 
If you’re a newbie to camping, why not start 
off with glamping, as it’s a great way of being 
at one with nature while being guaranteed 
a comfortable night’s sleep in a proper bed? 
Glamping accommodation comes in all forms: 
yurts, tepees, safari tents, and treehouses, 
to name a few. These are typically popular 
for groups of bachelors or bachelorettes, but 
also perfect for families and couples that are 
looking to escape from it all without having to 
buy all the camping equipment or worry about 
where to go to the bathroom. 


--- Page 11 ---
11
BEFORE YOU GO
 wiLd caMping 
Essentially, wild camping is camping wherever 
you please in the countryside. However, every 
country has its own rules and regulations, so you 
must check them out before you set off, as you 
could be penalized otherwise. Here is a list of 
some countries and their wild camping laws:
 
United States—Wild, or backcountry, camping 
is allowed in most United States national parks. 
However, each park has different rules and 
regulations for those who want to escape the 
regulated campground experience. Visit the website 
for the National Park Service (www.nps.gov) for rules 
for specific parks around the country, as well as 
additional camping tips and suggestions.


--- Page 12 ---
12
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
England, Northern Ireland, and Wales—
though most landowners tolerate respectful wild 
campers, wild camping without permission from the 
landowner is not allowed in any region apart from 
the Dartmoor National Park.
 
Scotland—wild camping is legal but there are 
guidelines that must be adhered to. Put simply, you 
must ensure that you’re safe and respectful, and that 
you leave the spot exactly as you found it. Find out 
more at www.visitscotland.com/accommodation/
camper-camping/wild-camping.
 
France—the wild camping rules aren’t hugely clear, 
although it’s understood that with the landowner’s 
permission it is generally accepted. However, lighting 
fires isn’t allowed and you must set off before 9 a.m. 
the next day.
 
Greece—wild camping is illegal here.
 
Norway and Sweden—based on allemannsretten 
(the right to roam), these countries allow ramblers free 
rein to open country, and wild camping is encouraged 
as long as you’re approximately 164 yards away from 
the nearest building and stay no longer than two nights 
if you don’t have permission from the landowner. For 
more information, visit www.visitnorway.com/plan-
your-trip/travel-tips-a-z/right-of-access. 


--- Page 13 ---
13
BEFORE YOU GO
WILD CAMPING 
ETIQUETTE
Assuming that your chosen country allows 
wild camping, here are some general rules 
to follow to ensure your respectfulness 
and safety during your stay:
 
Tell someone where you are going and 
for how long.
 
Be prepared for all weather conditions 
and eventualities.
 
Check for “no camping” signs before 
you pitch your tent.
 
Arrive late and leave early—wild camping 
is intended for sleeping at night only.
 
Make yourself as inconspicuous as possible.


--- Page 14 ---
14
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
Be considerate of your surroundings—
this includes nature, animals, and 
people. If asked to move on, do so 
speedily and politely.
 
Check there are no water sources nearby 
then make your toilet hole approximately 
6 inches deep in the earth. Cover up the 
hole and take your toilet paper with you 
when you go.
 
Start a fire only if safe to do so and monitor 
it at all times. Never light an open fire as 
it could be a danger to yourself and your 
environment. On leaving, ensure that the 
fire is completely extinguished.
 
Make sure the camping spot looks exactly 
the same when you leave as when you 
found it. Never leave trash!


--- Page 15 ---
15
the OutSide is the Only 
PLACE WE CAN TRULY
be InsIde the WorLd.
  Daniel J. Rice  


--- Page 16 ---
16
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
THE BEST COASTAL 
CAMPING SPOTS IN THE 
UNITED STATES
 
Cape Cod National Seashore, Massa-
chusetts
 
Assateague Island, Assateague State Park, 
Maryland
 
Islamorada, Florida Keys, Florida
 
Wai’anapanapa State Park, Maui, Hawaii
 
Black Sand Beach, Alaska
 
Flamenco Beach, Puerto Rico
 
Little Tybee Island, Georgia
 
Cape Lookout National Seashore, North 
Carolina
 
Wright’s Beach, Sonoma Coast State Park, 
California
 
Second Beach Trail, Olympic National Park, 
Washington


--- Page 17 ---
17
BEFORE YOU GO
THE BEST COASTAL 
CAMPING SPOTS IN THE UK 
AND EUROPE
 
Calgary Beach, Isle of Mull, Scotland
 
Treen, West Cornwall 
 
Aberafon, Llyn Peninsula, North Wales
 
Clachtoll Beach, Lochinver, Sutherland
 
The Gower, South Wales
 
Ladram Bay, Devon
 
Morecambe Bay, Lancashire
 
Castlerock, Northern Ireland
 
Falsterbo, Skåne, Sweden
 
Chia, Sardinia, Italy


--- Page 18 ---
18
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
THE BEST 
COUNTRYSIDE CAMPING 
SPOTS IN THE UNITED STATES
 
Big Bend National Park, Texas
 
Glacier National Park, Montana
 
Carlsbad Caverns National Park, New 
Mexico
 
Denali National Park, Alaska
 
Pisgah National Forest, North Carolina
 
Shenandoah National Park, Virginia
 
Sequoia and Kings Canyon National 
Parks, California
 
Yellowstone National Park, USA
 
Grand Teton National Park, Wyoming
 
Great Smoky Mountains National Park, 
Tennessee


--- Page 19 ---
19
BEFORE YOU GO
THE BEST 
COUNTRYSIDE CAMPING 
SPOTS IN THE UK AND 
EUROPE
 
Loch Lomond and the Trossachs, Scotland
 
Lake District National Park, Cumbria
 
The Black Mountains, Brecon Beacons, 
South Wales
 
Carneddau, Snowdonia, North Wales
 
Ugborough Moor, Dartmoor
 
The Cheviots, Borderlands, 
Northumberland
 
The Cairngorms, Scotland
 
La Fouly, The Alps, France
 
Hossa National Park, Finland
 
Connemara, Ireland


--- Page 20 ---
20
A GREAT MANY PEOPLE, 
and more all the time,
Live TheIr EntIre LivEs
WITHOUT EVER ONCE
SleEping out 
UNDER THE STARS. 
  Alan S. Kesselheim  


--- Page 21 ---
21
BEFORE YOU GO
orGanizIng 
The pErfecT triP
There are so many locations in the world to 
travel to, and for some, the world is their oyster. 
If the idea of packing lightly, hopping on a 
plane, renting a car, and venturing to a remote 
location sounds perfect and you have the budget 
to make it happen, your camping adventure 
awaits; it might require more planning than 
other vacations but it’ll be well worth it once 
you’ve arrived. Others will enjoy the comforts 
of camping in a familiar local spot, happy to be 
back in their favorite place. Although there are 
fewer things to worry about when organizing a 
trip closer to home, planning is still crucial so 
that everything goes as smoothly as possible. 
Whether you want to go large or low-key, think 
about the following factors before you go ahead 
and book your stay:


--- Page 22 ---
22
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 whO wilL 
 you Go wiTh? 
A once-in-a-lifetime camping trip is probably best 
done in small numbers or alone (if you’re brave 
enough), but if you’re planning to go with a large 
group of friends or family then a basic camping trip 
for a short duration may be more manageable. 
Traveling in a group means more differing 
opinions, which often leads to more arguments 
and a divide in the pack. Some will be more 
outspoken than others and you may end up not 
having much of a choice. Organizing things for 
lots of people can be a bit of a headache and 
there’s the possibility of certain people not being 
able to pay straight away or even dropping 
out. These issues can arise when organizing 
any type of trip, but can be more problematic 
when camping because, as you will be largely 
self-sufficient, there’s a lot more to think about. 


--- Page 23 ---
23
BEFORE YOU GO
A best friend or partner you can rely on and trust, 
who you know won’t start an argument over trivial 
matters, will be your best option when buddying 
up, but always think wisely before you ask them if 
they’d like to join you—you will be living in close 
quarters with them while you’re away. 
Of course, if you have a family, the likelihood 
is that you’ll want to go with them. Camping with 
children has many benefits: they can roam free 
in the fresh air (something that is happening less 
frequently these days) while you get some peace 
and quiet, and they can start to learn practical 
and essential skills.


--- Page 24 ---
24
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
CAMPING ALONE
If you think you could do it alone (and 
if you want to, of course!), always 
give two friends or relatives a realistic 
itinerary (your locations and dates) and 
keep a copy for yourself at all times. It 
might be best to laminate the document 
so that it won’t get ruined in the rain. 
Alternatively, there are apps you can 
download on your phone and GPS 
devices that track your whereabouts 
and offer information on your closest 
detected location. If you’re visiting a 
national park and there are rangers 
patrolling the grounds, give them your 
itinerary and contact number, and get 
theirs, in case of an emergency. 
Always keep a phone on you—even if 
you don’t have reception you may still 
be able to ring the emergency service 
numbers. Agree in advance convenient 


--- Page 25 ---
25
BEFORE YOU GO
times to call a friend or family—then 
stick to these times so that they don’t 
worry about your safety. 
Make sure you’re in a physically fit and 
healthy condition in advance of your trip. 
Book a doctor’s appointment before you 
go if you’re experiencing anything that’s 
out of the norm.
Read up on survival skills and practice 
important camping drills in preparation. 
Campfire building, navigation, weather 
forecasting, and first-aid are all import-
ant things to know. It’s also best to try a 
night under the stars in your yard (or a 
friend’s) as a dress rehearsal to squash 
any fears before the big event.
Keep busy with planned excursions and 
activities, as it can be easy to worry and 
to start feeling lonely if you don’t have 
anything organized. Plan these prior to 
the trip to help you make the most out of 
your camping experience. 


--- Page 26 ---
26
I FELT MY LUNGS INFLATE
With the OnrUsh of SceNery
—air, mountains, trees,
PEOPLE. I THOUGHT,
“This is What it 
IS TO BE HAPPY.”
  Sylvia Plath  


--- Page 27 ---
27
BEFORE YOU GO
deCidinG where 
And wHen tO go
If you have decided to go alone then the only 
opinion you have to worry about is your own. 
If you’re camping with other people, it’s best 
to chat with them first about their preferences 
before you set your heart on a destination. If 
your idea of a fun time is very different to the 
person or people you’ve agreed to go with, 
perhaps now is the time to reconsider your 
fellow camper(s) or decide if you’re willing to 
compromise. Giving their ideas a chance might 
lead you to partake in something you really 
enjoy but weren’t open to before. If they love the 
beach and you love mountainous landscapes, 
you could always arrange to experience both by 
planning a road trip. 


--- Page 28 ---
28
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
It might sound obvious, but if you’ve chosen 
a cold country it’s best to go in its warmer 
months. Camping in T-shirt weather is much 
more favorable—not only will your luggage be 
lighter but there’s a better chance of enjoying 
outdoors activities without getting chilly. Also 
check the average rainfall for the season you’d 
like to go in, as often you’ll find that the months 
in between the peak summer and winter periods 
are quite damp and gray—and there’s nothing 
worse than wearing soggy socks. Finally, if it’s an 
option, consider going while school is in session, 
as campground prices increase dramatically 
during school holidays.


--- Page 29 ---
29
BEFORE YOU GO
 buDget 
One of the biggest benefits of basic camping is 
how cheap it is compared with staying in more 
formal accommodations. If you don’t like the 
idea of roughing it, renting an RV or glamping 
will cost significantly more, but they’re still 
cheaper than staying in a hotel. When working 
out your camping budget, you need to factor in 
the following expenses: transport, campground 
fees, equipment, food and drink, days out, and a 
small buffer for any unexpected costs.
 
Camping gear—if you aren’t already set up with 
a tent and sleeping bag, etc., you’ll need to factor 
equipment into your budget. See “Equipment and 
gear,” page 33, for more information on what you 
need to take with you.
 
Transport—if you’re planning to go camping on 
the other side of the world, expect to pay up. You’ll 
need to think about the costs to/from the airport 


--- Page 30 ---
30
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
or ferry port and to/from the place you’re staying. 
Renting a car will cost extra per day, plus you’ll have 
to pay for the fuel. Of course, if you’re going local, 
then you’ll probably only need to pay for fuel or 
your public transport ticket. Think of every possible 
travel expense, so that parting with your money isn’t 
a surprise when you get there.
 
Campground fees—these vary depending on 
where you want to stay and what you’re staying in. 
Sleeping in a tent will be cheaper than staying in a 
camper, while choosing a spot that has electricity or 
Wi-Fi may be an additional extra. Popular locations 
that have a good view and are well connected are 
more expensive due to their attractiveness and 
convenience. You can save a lot of money by staying 
somewhere remote—or, if you have a very tight 
budget and your chosen destination allows it, why 
not try out wild camping (see page 11)?
 
Food and drink—bringing along your own food 
and drink to a campground is strongly encouraged. 
Not only will you experience true camping, but you’ll 
make huge savings. If you do forget to stock up on 
food before you arrive, make the extra journey to 
the nearest supermarket rather than buying your 
essentials at the local campground store (if they 


--- Page 31 ---
31
BEFORE YOU GO
even have one), where they’re bound to be more 
expensive. Think about the available cooking 
facilities before you go straight to the chilled aisles—
if you don’t have a fridge, it’s best to avoid items that 
can spoil quickly (such as meat and dairy products); 
if you don’t have a stove, then anything that needs to 
be heated up will be useless to you. Non-perishable 
foods (see page 79) will last the longest and are 
unlikely to get damaged in transit. 
 
Days out—of course, some activities are free, such 
as walking and swimming in the sea, but you may 
want to visit the local village and buy some souvenirs, 
or try out that water sport you’ve been itching to do 
for a long time. This is your vacation, after all, so 
keep some money aside to make it extra special.
 
Unexpected costs—it’s difficult to predict what life 
will throw at us, but it’s always best to factor in a 
little extra money for emergencies. For example, you 
might need to buy medication for a sick member of 
your group, or you may forget an essential piece of 
clothing or equipment that has to be replaced quickly. 
While some unexpected purchases can’t be avoided, 
you can protect your bank balance to some extent 
with travel insurance and up-to-date breakdown 
coverage if you’re traveling by car or camper. 


--- Page 32 ---
32
The stars were better 
ComPany AnyWaY.
They were very beautiful,
AND THEY ALMOST 
NevEr SnoReD. 
  David Eddings  


--- Page 33 ---
33
BEFORE YOU GO
eqUipmeNt anD geaR
 chOosinG the 
Right type of tEnt 
There are many factors you should consider 
when looking to buy a tent for your camping 
trip. For example, how many people does it 
need to sleep? What shape would you prefer 
it to be? What will the weather conditions and 
environment of your campground be like? 
First, let’s have a look at some of the most 
popular tent styles that are on the market:


--- Page 34 ---
34
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
The basic ridge tent—this 
comprises poles at either end of 
the tent, as well as a pole that 
holds up the ceiling. Ridge tents are stable and 
easy to erect, and come in all different sizes. 
However, they can be too small for those who 
are taller than hobbit height, and are generally 
only practical for sleeping in.
Dome tent—these tents have 
two very flexible poles that cross 
at the highest point of the tent’s 
structure and make it dome-shaped. They’re 
a lot taller than ridge tents due to the more 
vertically angled sides; however, they aren’t as 
stable, especially if you’re looking to go large 
and accommodate the whole family or a group 
of friends. 


--- Page 35 ---
35
BEFORE YOU GO
Geodesic and semi-geodesic 
tents—if you see a tent that is 
structured by a number of poles 
criss-crossing at different heights, it’s geodesic. 
Its complicated shape gives it stability, so it’s 
usually the recommended option for camping 
trips where you’ll be exposed to the elements or 
sleeping on rough terrain. Semi-geodesic tents 
are similar but have a simpler structure. 
Pop-up or quick-pitch tents—
these tents are designed to take 
any stress or challenge out of 
pitching up. Most are fitted with a sprung frame, 
meaning they quite literally pop open to a tent-
like form. These are particularly useful if you 
have children who are constantly on the go and 
time is of the essence. They come in all shapes 
and sizes, but should only be used in less extreme 
surroundings. Make sure you know how to fold 
away your pop-up tent before you head off, as 
some can be quite tricky to flatten.


--- Page 36 ---
36
THIS IS THE POETRY, 
the joy of a Wild 
and roving existence, 
WhiCh CanNot Come
TOO OFTEN. 
  Josiah Edward Spurr  
on camping


--- Page 37 ---
37
BEFORE YOU GO
 chOosinG the 
 
Right size tent
Tents are measured in berths, which refers to 
the number of people and amount of luggage 
they can hold. When browsing for their humble 
camping abode, lots of people make the mistake 
of choosing a berth size just big enough for the 
number of people who will be using the tent but 
often forget that each person will be carrying at 
least one backpack—not to mention extra bags, 
coolers, and other camping equipment.


--- Page 38 ---
38
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
If you’ll be sleeping in a tent with one other 
person, it’s usually recommended that you buy 
a tent with a berth of four; if there are three of 
you, then a five-berth tent is advisable. However, 
if you know that your luggage amounts to a 
week’s worth of clothing and the kitchen sink, 
then it’s a safe bet to choose the next berth up 
from what’s recommended. You don’t want to 
end up having to decide whether it’s you or the 
luggage that sleeps outside.


--- Page 39 ---
39
BEFORE YOU GO
hoW to Prolong 
Your teNt’S lifE
Purchasing a tent and all the extras for your 
big camping trip can burn quite a hole in your 
pocket, so follow these tips to help make your 
tent last longer:
 
Purchase a groundsheet protector or create a 
makeshift one (see page 64), as the groundsheet 
is the part of the tent most likely to suffer from wear 
and tear.
 
Always be careful when feeding the poles through 
the tent’s material so you don’t rip the fabric. Rub 
a layer of lubricant onto the poles before you erect 
the tent to make it easier to slide them through. 
Regularly apply lubricant on the tent’s zips to stop 
them from jamming and eventually breaking.


--- Page 40 ---
40
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
While your tent is pitched, regularly check that 
stones or any other sharp objects haven’t entered it, 
as these could rip the groundsheet. 
 
If camping in direct sunlight, cover your tent with a 
sheet or tarp to help protect it from UV exposure.
 
Every time you use your tent, remember to wash 
the fabric and poles down with soapy water when 
you’re back at home, then let it dry before you pack 
it away—especially if you’ve camped near the sea—
to prevent corrosion. 
 
If you don’t use your tent frequently, clean and 
reproof the fabric every so often with the correct 
products, and never machine wash or tumble dry it.


--- Page 41 ---
41
BEFORE YOU GO
 chOosinG the 
 
Right sleePing baG
If you want to purchase a sleeping bag for your 
camping trip, always take into account how 
chilly it will be at night in the place where you’re 
staying and how susceptible you are to the cold. 
It’s best to take your time looking at your options 
before rushing into buying the first one you see, 
as it’s one of the most important pieces of gear 
you’ll need when out under the stars.
Sleeping bags come in different shapes: 
the most common are mummy sleeping bags 
(those that look coffin-like) and rectangular 
sleeping bags, both of which are also available 
for children. Those who like to wrap themselves 
up in their duvet at night would probably lean 
towards the mummy style as the enclosed space 
keeps the heat in, although movement is slightly 
restricted. The more traditional, rectangular-


--- Page 42 ---
42
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
shaped bags are for those who like to shuffle 
from side to side while asleep. Some rectangular 
sleeping bags can be doubled up if you want to 
share your space with your partner; check on the 
label if this function is available.
You should find at least one of three ratings 
on the labels of most sleeping bags. Comfort 
ratings signify the warmth of the sleeping bag—
if you get hot quickly, it’s better to go for a low 
rating, and if you get cold quickly, choose a 
high rating. Extreme ratings are only required if 
you plan to camp in freezing conditions, while 
season ratings are displayed to help you decide 
on the most suitable sleeping bag for the time 
of year you’re camping. The most convenient 
rating to refer to is the season rating, which 
ranges from one to five—one being ideal for 
hot countries or camping in the peak of summer, 
and five being suitable for the harshest, most 
wintery conditions. 


--- Page 43 ---
43
BEFORE YOU GO
Take into account the weight and bulk of the 
sleeping bag. If you’re planning on using your 
RV or car as a luggage vessel, this won’t be 
something you need to worry about, but if you 
want to be able to hike from one place to the 
next with your sleeping bag strapped to your 
back then it needs to be lightweight without 
sacrificing quality and warmth. 
Mummy
sleeping bag
Rectangular 
sleeping bag


--- Page 44 ---
44
WhaTever Form it TakEs,
CAMPING IS EARTHY,
Soul-EnrIcHing 
and character-building.
  Pippa Middleton  


--- Page 45 ---
45
BEFORE YOU GO
 chOosinG the 
Right backPack
There are several factors you need to consider 
before you purchase a backpack for your 
camping trip. It will be one of the key items you 
take with you, especially if you’re hiking from 
site to site, and if you buy the wrong one, you 
may end up falling out with it.
 
Don’t impulse buy—everyone loves a sale, but 
just because a backpack is 70 percent off, that 
doesn’t mean you should buy it without browsing 
first. There are discounts and offers on throughout 
the year, so bide your time until you find something 
suitable for you. Don’t be seduced by a backpack’s 
attractiveness or color either.


--- Page 46 ---
46
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
Quality—don’t look at your backpack as just a 
bag, but see it as the keeper of all your belongings 
for the duration of your camping trip. It needs to 
be comfortable, durable, and fit well. If you want 
to check all these boxes, expect to pay more than 
you might anticipate—but you’ll be thankful for 
purchasing a good quality product once you’re 
on the road. While you don’t have to buy a super 
expensive backpack, make sure it’s at least middle 
of the range, as the cheaper you go, the less 
comfortable it’ll be.
 
Size—backpacks are measured in liters, which might 
seem strange if you’ve never had a backpack before. 
The best advice is not to concentrate on how many 
liters it holds but to use common sense and check to 
see if it’s big enough to hold the amount of clothes 
you’d like to take. (We’ll talk about packing later 
in this chapter.) Also, remember that you may be 
carrying your backpack a lot. Purchasing the biggest 
of them all will put a massive strain on your body, 
especially if you’re small in height and frame.


--- Page 47 ---
47
BEFORE YOU GO
 
Padding—the more cushioning on the shoulder 
straps and hip belt, the better, as this will help 
alleviate some of the stress being put on your body. 
 
Extra rucksack—a lot of backpacks come with 
an extra daypack that you can attach to the back 
of the backpack. These are really handy for all the 
day trips and excursions you’ll have planned during 
your camping trip. However, when you’re carrying 
all your luggage, make sure the rucksack isn’t 
actually attached to the backpack itself, as this will 
cause great strain on your back. Instead, wear the 
rucksack on your front to even out the weight slightly.


--- Page 48 ---
48
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
TOP TIP
Never buy your backpack straight from 
the internet without seeing it. You should 
try it on and rummage through all the 
different compartments first—buying it 
online, without having vetted it in-store, 
stops you from doing this. Go to a store, 
wear it, and even take some clothes and 
shoes with you to see how they fit inside 
it. Don’t worry that everyone is going to 
look at you like you’re raving mad; this is 
a more common practice than you may 
think and the best way to tell if it’s the 
right backpack for you.


--- Page 49 ---
49
WitHout the IntEnse 
TOUCH OF NATURE, 
you can never fully 
FreShen YouRself!
  Mehmet Murat Ildan  
˙


--- Page 50 ---
50
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 whAt yoU 
Will Need
It’s so easy to forget to pack something when 
you go camping—not only do you have to think 
about your everyday items, but you also have to 
consider the not so obvious, especially if this is 
your first time literally out in the sticks. To offer 
a helping hand, the following pages include 
checklists of items you’ll need for short and long 
breaks away. (If you’re wild camping, be frugal 
with what you pack.)
Basic items:
 
Tent
 
Spare tent pegs
 
Groundsheet
 
Mallet/hammer—to knock tent pegs into the ground


--- Page 51 ---
51
BEFORE YOU GO
 
Swiss army knife
 
Duct tape—useful for almost any emergency
 
Backpack and daypack
 
Sleeping bag—double up two sleeping bags if 
you’re going somewhere cold
 
Pillow—save space by taking a blow-up pillow or a 
sweater
 
Waterproof jacket
 
Cell phone and charger
 
Map
 
Guidebook
 
Ear plugs—if it’s your first time camping, you might 
find that your senses are overactive
 
Flashlight/headlamp—plus spare batteries
 
Trash bags—picking up all your trash is the number-
one camping rule
 
String/cord—to use as a makeshift washing line
 
Food and drink
 
Lightweight stove/grill


--- Page 52 ---
52
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
Gas/charcoal—remember to take a fire starter if 
using charcoal
 
Matches/lighter
 
Saucepan(s)
 
Bowl(s)/plate(s) 
 
Cutlery
 
Water bottle
 
Water filter or treatment tablets
 
Bowl for doing dishes and dish detergent
 
Washcloth and dishcloth
 
First-aid kit—see page 62 for a checklist of 
medical items
 
Biodegradable soap
 
Wet wipes
 
Toilet paper
 
Travel towel—made of a material that takes up less 
than half the room of a normal towel
 
Toothbrush and toothpaste
 
Sunscreen


--- Page 53 ---
53
BEFORE YOU GO
If you’re traveling with a camper or a car, then 
you’ll be able to take more with you and most 
of the items in the extras list will be appropriate 
to you. If you’re planning to travel by public 
transport or on foot, then you’ll be limited and 
should stick to the basics list. 
Extra items:
 
Driver’s license(s)
 
Sleeping mat/air mattress—for a comfier night’s sleep 
(don’t forget the pump if taking an air mattress)
 
Tarp/sun shade
 
Windbreak—for privacy
 
Foldable chairs and table
 
Electrical extension cord—to power low-wattage 
electrical appliances
 
Kettle or stovetop coffee pot
 
Lantern
 
Kitchen utensils
 
Cooler/freezer bag


--- Page 54 ---
54
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
Can opener
 
Hand mirror
 
Insect repellent
 
Bike(s)
 
Bike rack—if traveling by car or RV
 
Hiking poles
 
Umbrella
 
Games and books
 
Camera
 
Binoculars 
 
Star chart


--- Page 55 ---
55
AT SOME POINT IN LIFE
the WorLd’s BeaUty
BECOMES ENOUGH.
  Toni Morrison  


--- Page 56 ---
56
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
clOthes—dresSing 
 
 ApproPriatelY 
What clothes you take with you will depend 
entirely on where you’re going and when. For 
example, you won’t need your swimwear if 
you’re planning to visit Norway in midwinter! 
Nevertheless, it’s sometimes tricky to decide 
what to pack when you have limited space, 
and the weather can be unpredictable if you’re 
camping somewhere like the UK. 
As a rule of thumb, you should avoid wearing 
black in the summer, as the color will absorb the 
heat and leave you feeling like a radiator. On 
the other hand, white reflects the heat. If you’re 
camping somewhere hot and you don’t like white, 
go for pale colors instead, as they’ll have more or 
less the same effect. It’s also best to wear natural 
or moisture-wicking fabrics (such as cotton, linen, 
or polyester) to help increase the airflow to your 


--- Page 57 ---
57
BEFORE YOU GO
skin, while loose-fitting or floaty outfits will help 
your skin stay cooler. If you are hiking, choose 
clothes made of synthetic material, as fabrics 
such as cotton and linen trap moisture.
A baseball cap is useful for blocking the sun 
from your eyes and will keep your face protected 
from the UV rays. Alternatively, a mid-brimmed 
or floppy hat will do the job, although some may 
find a floppy hat too distracting when embarking 
on a long trek. A more practical option to 
protect your face from the sun is a headscarf 
or buff, especially if you need to create more 
luggage space.
One material to avoid while camping during 
the summer months is denim. Even if you wear 
your trusty jeans every day of the week and can’t 
bear the thought of leaving them behind, take 
heed, as they come with many disadvantages. 
Firstly, denim traps heat and will make you feel 
hotter than you are. Secondly, jeans take up 
essential space. Lastly, if you’re wearing jeans 
out in the rain you should be prepared to have 
a soggy bottom and heavy legs for the rest of 


--- Page 58 ---
58
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
the day—denim takes a long time to dry out, 
especially if the sun isn’t shining.
If you’re going camping in the winter or 
somewhere cold, bring double or triple of all your 
items of clothing. Always take one or two layers 
more than you think you’ll need to abate any fears 
about being chilly. Unlike the fabrics you’d wear 
in the summer, you’ll need to stock up on items 
made of merino wool and insulating synthetics. 
For cold-weather or winter camping, your 
base layers should be tight-fitting to your skin 
to trap heat, and moisture-wicking to prevent 
the absorption and retention of moisture. Your 
middle layers should be made of either wool or 
fleece, and buy sweaters or hoodies where the 
neck is longer than usual to keep the drafts out. 
For your top layers, you need a coat or jacket 
that will provide warmth and act as a barrier 
against the rain and wind. If you’ve chosen 
your other layers well and you’re sure that 
you won’t be facing extremely cold conditions, 
you might want to wear a lightweight jacket to 
allow more movement. 


--- Page 59 ---
59
BEFORE YOU GO
To protect your legs from the cold, take the same 
measures as for dressing your top half. Wear 
moisture-wicking leggings (the ones you wear 
to do exercise) or thermals for your base layer, 
and waterproof pants (thick or thin depending 
on how cold it’ll be) for your top layer. 
Lastly, a lot of heat escapes from the extremities 
of your body, so don’t forget your hat, gloves, 
scarf/neck warmer, and big, woolly socks—and 
try to keep these dry, as they’re less effective 
when wet. 
Middle layer
Top layer
Base layer


--- Page 60 ---
60
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
TOP TIP
If you’re traveling with someone, don’t 
take double of what you need. For 
example, if you both use a hairbrush 
and don’t mind sharing, then just take 
one, or share your sunscreen and 
toothpaste—this means you’ll have less 
to carry and you’ll be able to fit extra 
items in your bag. 


--- Page 61 ---
61
TheRe’s a SunRise and 
a sunset every single 
DAY, AND THEY’RE 
AbsOlUteLy Free. 
Don’t miss so many of them. 
  Jo Walton  


--- Page 62 ---
62
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 fiRst-aId kiT—
What You neeD
When you’re alone or with very few people, you 
need to be more prepared for an emergency 
than usual—and you need the proper equipment 
in order to carry out first-aid. Here’s a list of 
the main items you should pack in your bag of 
medical goodies: 
 
Prescription medicine—if required
 
Painkillers
 
An assortment of strong fabric band-aids—water-
proof band-aids will slip off the minute you start to 
sweat
 
Blister pads
 
Gauze bandages
 
Safety pins
 
Antiseptic wipes and cream


--- Page 63 ---
63
BEFORE YOU GO
 
Antiseptic gloves
 
Eye wash
 
Burn gel/cream
 
Sunscreen
 
Sunburn relief (Aloe Vera gel)
 
Insect repellent
 
Cream for relief from insect bites and stings


--- Page 64 ---
64
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
TOP TIP
It’s a nightmare when you’re trying to 
get some sleep and all you can feel is 
the lumps and bumps of the ground 
beneath you. Try this hack for a comfier 
time camping.
Buy some interlocking foam floor tiles 
(the ones that are used in children’s 
nurseries) or a couple of yoga mats. 
Once you’ve pitched your tent, put these 
down on the base of the tent for extra 
padding. Happy comfy camping!


--- Page 65 ---
65
BEFORE YOU GO
chOosinG your 
TransPort 
If you want to experience complete peace and 
quiet, you have a greater chance of achieving 
this by wild camping in the middle of nowhere. 
However, taking a car or camper on your camping 
trip will give you access to more places and throw 
up fewer issues than camping with only a tent. 
Whether you want to hire or buy a camper, the 
list below gives details of the different ones on 
the market and their benefits:
 
Twin-axle campers—these vehicles are usually 
big and heavy and therefore require twin axles. This 
makes them easier to tow but difficult to park.
 
Teardrop trailers—these are compact and easy to 
tow. Due to their size, there isn’t much floor space—
most are just big enough to allow for a double bed.


--- Page 66 ---
66
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
Pop-top campers—the roofs of these campers 
can extend upwards when stationary, creating 
extra headroom. 
 
Folding campers—these look like your average 
trailer when towed, but once erected they transform 
into fully fledged campers. Although their set-up is 
quite time-consuming, they can be neatly stored 
when not in use and they’re easy to manoeuvre. 
 
Airstream campers—if you can afford camping in 
style and luxury, these silver bullets are a must-have. 
However, they will set you back almost $100,000—
well, we can all dream… 
If you don’t want to tow a camper, RVs are a 
fantastic alternative, especially to rent. RVs range 
in size and quality, and can come with a fixed 
roof, high-top, or rising roof, or over-cab beds. 


--- Page 67 ---
67
THE EARTH HAS 
music for those 
who LisTeN.
  George Santayana  


--- Page 68 ---
68
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
DRIVING LAWS AND 
REGULATIONS FOR TOWING 
CAMPERS OR RVS
According to the United States Depart-
ment of Transportation, different states 
and municipalities have different re-
quirement based on the size and weight 
of what you are towing, especially if it 
is over eight feet wide. Some states may 
require special permits and licenses, 
or additional equipment such as side 
and rear-view mirrors. Your local motor 
vehicle administration will have the 
requirements and rules that will affect 
your travel. If you plan to travel through 
other states, don’t forget to check their 
requirements as well.
When you’re driving an RV, the laws 
also differ from state to state. If you’re 
driving a motorcoach, where people can 


--- Page 69 ---
69
BEFORE YOU GO
freely walk around while the RV is in 
motion, you may want to check on the 
relevant seatbelt laws. In addition, open 
container laws may apply to you if you 
are carrying alcohol in your fridge. It’s 
technically allowed in many states, since 
an RV is considered a domicile, but make 
sure it’s not within the driver’s reach—you 
don’t want to get pulled over and be faced 
with a questioning police officer! There 
may also be rules for transporting propane 
or other gases or fuels through tunnels.
Another issue that could come up is 
the transportation of firearms. Rules 
for how, when, and where you carry a 
firearm vary from state to state, so make 
sure to look up the rules for transporting 
and carrying firearms in each state 
you plan on traveling through. Lastly, 
don’t forget to contact your insurance 
company to make sure you have the 
proper coverage!


--- Page 70 ---
70
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 drIving 
an rv
The last thing you want to happen when you take 
your RV on its first (or second, third, or fourth…) 
adventure is to total it or have part of it repaired. 
Follow these tips to ensure you drive your rental 
or own camper as well as possible:
 
Create a checklist of things that need to be secured 
down, locked, or tidied away before you set off 
driving—you don’t want plates flying onto the floor 
and smashing just because you forgot to put them 
away. Also, if doors aren’t shut properly, they could 
swing open when you turn the vehicle and cause 
damage to other furniture.


--- Page 71 ---
71
BEFORE YOU GO
 
Know the size of your RV—there are many road signs 
warning of height and width restrictions. Instead 
of disregarding them, as plenty of car owners do, 
make sure you take note, as you could damage 
your RV otherwise. Before setting off, write down the 
dimensions of the vehicle—you can find them out by 
looking online (take into account any added extras, 
such as a bike rack or roof box) or measuring it 
yourself—and display the measurements so they’re 
easy to see when you’re driving. Jot down the 
numbers in both feet and meters so you don’t get 
caught out in a foreign country.
 
Keep the manual on you at all times—this will have 
all the key information you need if you encounter a 
problem with your RV. Also jot down the details of 
some local mechanics in the area you’re visiting, and 
always ensure you have insurance and breakdown 
coverage for your trips. 
 
Check in advance for toll booths—search your route 
online before you go to see if you’ll need to have 
some money handy for toll charges. Remember that 
RVs will probably cost more than cars.


--- Page 72 ---
72
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
Plan ahead for gasoline and take a spare can with 
you. It’s worth having a spare tire or plug kit, too.
 
Drive safely—RVs drive very differently from cars, 
plus they’re more than double the size and weight. 
They’re slower, take longer to come to a stop, and 
are more difficult to handle. Don’t drive it as if it 
were a small hatchback—instead take your time 
and check your mirrors twice as often as you would 
driving a car, especially when turning and changing 
lanes. Additionally, take extra care overtaking other 
vehicles, as it’ll take longer to accelerate past them.
 
Lock up when leaving your RV unattended—although 
your RV park may feel safe, you never know when 
thieves are lurking, so always be cautious about 
leaving your vehicle unlocked when you aren’t there, 
even if you’re just dashing to the campground’s 
bathrooms. It’s best to keep expensive items, such 
as electronic gadgets, out of sight. 


--- Page 73 ---
73
TheRe was NowHere 
to go but everywhere, 
SO JUST KEEP ON ROLLING
UndEr the StaRs.
  Jack Kerouac  


--- Page 74 ---
74
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 rv 
 
MaintEnancE
If you don’t use your camper very often, ensuring 
that it’s working properly before embarking 
on your trip is essential—you don’t want your 
holiday to be put on hold while you wait for a 
towing service to come to the rescue. Follow 
these maintenance tips to make your journey 
smoother:
 
Service the RV regularly—although this may seem 
like an unnecessary expense, servicing your RV 
should extend its life, as essential fluids are replaced 
and the vehicle is given a once-over “health check.” 
 
Check the condition of your tires and make sure they 
have the required amount of air inside. If they look 
disfigured or if they’re bald, replace them instantly.


--- Page 75 ---
75
BEFORE YOU GO
 
Test all the electronics and replace any broken bulbs.
 
Check that the handbrake is easy to move up and 
down and hasn’t seized up.
 
Test that all the kitchen appliances work. 
 
Give your RV a good cleaning before and after your 
trip. Don’t leave it in a mess when you get home as 
it’ll only be twice as tricky to clean the next time you 
use it!


--- Page 76 ---
76
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 drIving A 
 
RenteD vehIcle 
If you’re planning to rent an RV or car, take into 
consideration the following things:
 
Take your driver’s license and the licenses of any 
traveling companions who will take turns driving.
 
Research whether you’ll need to apply for any 
international driver’s permits and take these with 
you too.
 
Take an extra form of ID (such as a utility bill or 
passport) with you.
 
Remember to take the reservation details too.
 
Take your credit card—you’ll need this for the rental 
and the deposit.
 
Check the pick-up time and location—if you arrive 
late, you could lose out on the vehicle as the 
company might offer it to someone else. If you’re 


--- Page 77 ---
77
BEFORE YOU GO
delayed, contact the number in the reservation 
confirmation to let them know.
 
Make sure you’re given an inventory of all the items 
in the vehicle and check they are in fact there. If 
they aren’t, make a note of this on the inventory, 
as well as of anything that is damaged, and hand 
the inventory back to the customer assistant. It’s 
also worth taking dated photos of existing scratches, 
dents, and any damage you think they could hold 
you responsible for before you head off.
 
Always read the terms and conditions and the 
insurance policy extra carefully and query anything 
you don’t understand. Some rental vehicles are only 
insured during the day and you must stop driving 
when the sun sets otherwise you’ll be accountable for 
anything that happens after that time. Information 
like this is crucial to know, and you can find it all in 
the paperwork.
 
Ensure that the drop-off point is on your route—
exploring your destination may mean that you 
want the start and finish points to be different. 
Double-check this information on the reservation 
confirmation as you could end up paying a fee if 
you return the vehicle to the wrong depot.


--- Page 78 ---
78
Between every two pines 
THERE IS A DOOR 
LeaDing to a 
NEW WAY OF LIFE.
  John Muir  


--- Page 79 ---
79
BEFORE YOU GO
caMpgroUnd mEals
 stOckinG up 
On fooD
Whether you’re staying in a camper or tent, non-
perishable food that can be eaten without fuss is 
what to look for when rummaging in the aisles of 
the supermarket. Here’s a list of recommended 
foods to take for snacking and breakfasting on:
 
Granola bars or energy balls
 
Dried fruit
 
Fresh fruit—but only the hardy stuff, such as apples, 
pears, and oranges
 
Peanut butter or jam


--- Page 80 ---
80
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
Bread, rolls, or bagels—or all three
 
Crackers
 
Pre-made salads—including rice and potato salads 
to maintain your energy levels
 
Hummus and carrots
 
Cereal—if you like eating it dry
 
Nuts
 
Chips
 
Chocolate—remember to keep it cool, as sweaty 
chocolate is definitely not cool
 
Sugary sweets
 
Cold pizza—cooked the day before
 
The mighty Ramen
 
Granola bars


--- Page 81 ---
81
BEFORE YOU GO
 caMping mealS 
If you have a portable stove and gas or a grill, 
or your camper is kitted out with a stove top, you 
can have some fun cooking hot meals for your 
camping crew. Don’t plan anything too fancy 
though, as you’ll have limited space, appliances, 
and utensils. Also, if you don’t have access to 
a fridge, the food items that you purchase and 
carry with you need to be non-perishable. 
Alternatively, you can go to the nearest store 
and buy your refrigerated goods just before you 
want to start cooking. Here’s a list of favorite hot 
meals to have while camping:


--- Page 82 ---
82
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
Pasta
 
Scrambled eggs 
 
Bacon 
 
Nachos 
 
Grilled ham and cheese 
 
Salmon 
 
Hot dogs and burgers 
 
Toasted marshmallows—don’t forget the sticks for 
holding them over your campfire
 
Roasted apples 


--- Page 83 ---
83
BEFORE YOU GO
If you’re traveling with limited supplies and 
you’re refrigerator-free, here’s a list of handy 
key ingredients:
 
Fruit and veggies—such as corn on the cob, butternut 
squash, mushrooms, onions, apples, and oranges
 
Oatmeal
 
Pasta, rice, lentils, and beans
 
Canned tuna
 
Canned tomatoes
 
Cooking oil
 
Tea bags, instant coffee, and hot chocolate—if you 
have access to a kettle or campfire
 
Long-life milk
 
Water or fruit juice


--- Page 84 ---
84
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
TOP TIP
Those containers that small mints come in 
are the perfect size for storing salt, pepper, 
and spices—you’ll never have a dull meal 
again, even if noodles are on the menu 
for the fourth day in a row. Just remember 
to eat all the mints first before pouring in 
your miscellaneous goodies!


--- Page 85 ---
85
CooKing and EatIng
food outdoors makes it 
TASTE INFINITELY BETTER
than the same meal 
PREPARED AND 
ConSumed IndOors.
  Fennel Hudson  


--- Page 86 ---
86
whIle you 
Are awaY
YOU’VE PLANNED YOUR CAMPING 
TRIP AND NOW YOU JUST NEED TO 
EXPERIENCE IT AND MAKE EVERY 
MOMENT COUNT! FROM PRACTICAL 
FIRST-AID ADVICE AND HANDY 
CAMPING HACKS TO IDEAS FOR 
KEEPING EVERYONE ENTERTAINED, 
THIS SECTION WILL BE YOUR GO-TO 
WHEN YOU GET ON THE ROAD. 


--- Page 87 ---
87
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
caMping etiqUette 
And tipS
 
 hoW to Find A 
Good Place to mAke cAmp 
If you’re wild camping and have the good fortune 
to be able to camp wherever you like, take heed 
of the following tips:


--- Page 88 ---
88
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
Never camp at the bottom of a hill or slope—it might 
feel sheltered there but if it rains, you’ll soon know 
about it when your tent and all the ground around it 
becomes waterlogged. Instead, choose somewhere 
level which has slightly soft ground.
 
Make sure there are no hazards above you, such 
as power lines and trees, because if there are high 
winds, these could cost you your life. 
 
Pitch your tent so that the back of it is facing into the 
wind for maximum protection from the elements.
 
Even if you love being near water, don’t camp closer 
than 200 feet to the source—even further away is 
preferable. This is to ensure the preservation of 
the ecosystem it supports and is in line with wild 
camping’s main rule of “leave no trace.” 


--- Page 89 ---
89
RAINSTORMS WILL TRAVEL
ThoUsAnds of MilEs,
AGAINST PREVAILING
winds for the opportunity
TO RAIN ON A TENT.
  Dave Barry  


--- Page 90 ---
90
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 caMpgroUnd rUles 
 
Don’t be noisy. As you’re out in the open, noise 
will carry further than usual, and you don’t want to 
annoy your temporary neighbors. This is especially 
true at night, but try to keep it down in the day too.
 
Maintain a respectful distance from your camp-
ground neighbors. If possible, try to pitch up at least 
20 feet away, although in the summer and busy 
periods this can become tricky. Don’t let your table 
and chairs wander into their area, and make sure 
you use the paths of the campground rather than 
anyone else’s area as a thoroughfare.
 
Leave your pitch area and other facilities as clean as 
you found them. It’s your responsibility to dispose of 
any trash you’ve accumulated. 
 
If camping with kids or dogs, make sure they’re well-
behaved and you know where they are at all times.
 
Don’t ever drive in a campground to go short 
distances—for example, from your camping area to 
the toilets or campground store—as too many cars 
can be a hazard and cause noise pollution. Walk 
instead.


--- Page 91 ---
91
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 spOt thE 
DiffeRence
When everything looks the same it’s very easy to 
get lost on a campground or in the countryside. 
If you’re wild camping, try to choose a spot that is 
next to or near a memorable landmark. Perhaps 
there’s a towering tree or a corner of a field 
that you’ll remember easily. If you can’t choose 
where you pitch up, this is where the following 
tip comes in handy.
To help you trace your tracks back to where 
you’re staying, video yourself walking either to 
or from your tent to a place that’s easy to spot. 
Focus on the landmarks you pass. If you’re 
super-forgetful and don’t mind getting strange 
looks, it might even be worth doing a running 
commentary while you’re making the video to 
help prompt you.


--- Page 92 ---
92
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 theRe’S a tHief 
In my tent
It’s easy to get caught up in the friendly camping 
experience but always try to be safety savvy, 
as you wouldn’t want your vacation ruined by 
thieves. Here are a few tips to help keep you 
protected at all times:
 
Although it seems like the logical thing to do, 
don’t lock up your tent when you leave it. It’ll only 
encourage thieves to think that you have valuables 
stored inside and a lock isn’t going to stop them 
from tearing through the flimsy material of the tent.
 
There could be a very small possibility that thieves 
will try to steal things from your tent while you’re 
sleeping. To beat them at their own game, the best 
place to stash your valuables is in the bottom of your 
sleeping bag. The thing that then lies between the 
thief and the valuables is you, sleeping soundly and 
holding the fort without even knowing it.


--- Page 93 ---
93
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 
If the above does happen, and you wake up from 
slumber, do your best to restrain yourself from 
confronting or challenging an intruder. Instead, wait 
until they’ve left the area and then tell campground 
staff or the police. In the moment you may want to 
give them what they deserve, but it’ll only provoke 
them more.
 
If you’re going for a day trip and you’re leaving your 
camper at the campground, remember to do a full 
check before you leave. Shut all the windows, lock 
all the doors, place all valuables out of sight (you 
shouldn’t bring many expensive items with you for 
this reason in the first place), and fingers crossed, 
you won’t have a problem. 


--- Page 94 ---
94
There is something 
InfInIteLy HeaLing
IN THE REPEATED 
refrains of nature—
THE ASSURANCE THAT
dawn comes after night, 
and SprIng AftEr WinTeR.
  Rachel Carson  


--- Page 95 ---
95
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
fiRst-aId adVice
Prepare yourself for any emergencies when you’re 
out in the sticks by learning some basic first-aid 
skills. This is especially important if you’re wild 
camping or there isn’t a first-aid medic in your 
campground. The following techniques are the 
most commonly used in case of an emergency.


--- Page 96 ---
96
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 whAt to do iF 
 
SomeoNe is unreSponsivE 
But bReathIng 
If a fellow camper is unconscious but still 
breathing, perform the following steps:
1. Open the airway by gently tilting the patient’s 
forehead back with one hand and lifting the chin 
with the other.
2. Check for any signs of breathing—look out for chest 
movement, and sounds and heat coming from 
their mouth.
3. Put them in the recovery position (see page 100).
4. Call the emergency services for help and stay with 
the casualty, regularly checking if their breathing 
has changed at all, until they arrive.


--- Page 97 ---
97
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 whAt to do iF 
SomeoNe is unreSponsivE 
And nOt brEathing 
If your fellow camper is unresponsive and 
not breathing, you will have to perform CPR 
(cardiopulmonary resuscitation), a combination 
of chest compressions and rescue breaths. But 
first, call the emergency services.


--- Page 98 ---
98
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
Chest compressions
1. Kneel beside the casualty and place the end of 
your palm towards the end of the breastbone in the 
center of their chest.
2. Place your other hand on top of the first and interlock 
your fingers but stay away from their ribs.
3. With your arms straight, lean over the casualty, 
pressing down on their breastbone by about 2 
inches.
4. Keeping your hands where they are, release pressure 
until their chest is in the normal position—this is one 
compression. Repeat 30 times and keep in rhythm 
with the Bee Gees’ song “Stayin’ Alive” to help you 
keep the correct speed.


--- Page 99 ---
99
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
Rescue breaths (Note that the American Heart 
Association no longer recommends the use of 
“rescue breaths”)
Once you’ve done a set of compressions, give 
the casualty two rescue breaths.
1. Open the casualty’s airway, hold their nose closed, 
take a deep breath, and blow the air into the 
casualty’s mouth until their chest rises.
2. Then lift away and let their chest fall. Repeat 
once more, followed by chest compressions, and 
continue until help arrives. If they start to breathe 
normally again, stop CPR and put them in the 
recovery position.


--- Page 100 ---
100
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 hoW to puT 
SomeoNe in the 
RecovEry pOsition 
You will need to put someone in the recovery 
position if they become unresponsive.
1. Kneel down in front of the casualty and place their 
arm that’s nearest to you at a right angle to their 
body, palm facing upwards.
2. Take their arm that’s farthest from you and bend it 
so their hand is positioned on their opposite cheek, 
palm facing away from the cheek.
3. Lift their leg that’s farthest from you so the knee is 
bent and the foot is flat on the floor. Next, roll them on 
their side by moving the bent knee across their body 
to the ground. As they roll over, the hand placed on 
their cheek should become a support for their head. 
4. Gently tilt their head back to ensure their airway 
is open. Phone the emergency services and keep 
checking the casualty’s breathing until they arrive.


--- Page 101 ---
101
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 hoW to 
 
Apply a drEssinG
1. Firstly, wash the wound and make sure there’s no 
dirt or grit in it.
2. For small cuts, just use a band-aid For anything 
bigger, use a sterile pad with bandage tape.
3. Cut the sterile pad so it covers the whole of the 
wound with a little extra to make sure there’s space 
on all sides.
4. Place the pad on the wound, using surgical gloves 
if possible and making sure you don’t touch the 
part of the pad which will be in direct contact with 
the wound.
5. Use ample amounts of bandage tape to hold the 
pad in place. 


--- Page 102 ---
102
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 suNscreEn, 
 
Not sUn-scReam
You don’t want to ruin your camping experience 
by getting sunburned—and sunstroke is no fun 
either, especially when you’re sleeping in a hot 
tent. Even if you’re good at applying sunscreen 
you can still get sunburned when you’re outside 
all day. Here are some tips for staying safe in 
the sun that you might not have thought about 
before:
 
Don’t apply sunscreen too thinly—although it’s 
expensive and you want it to last as long as possible, 
you aren’t going to be protected by putting on just 
a few blobs. Experts say that for each application, 
you should be using an ounce—enough to fill a shot 
glass—in order to cover your entire body.


--- Page 103 ---
103
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 
To make applying sunscreen as easy a task as 
possible, use the spray-on kind. It’s hassle-free and 
you won’t have to put up with sticky hands for the 
rest of the day.
 
Remember to apply sunscreen to your neck and ears. 
 
If you’re going to wear sunscreen, wear it properly 
and make sure you reapply it—even if you’ve got 
the “all-day” stuff. It’s easy to forget to do this when 
you’re having such a good time, so it might be worth 
setting a time with your fellow campers for you all 
to reapply it.
 
Aim to stay in the shade for part of the peak of the 
day (between noon and 2 pm). This is tricky to do 
in reality but even staying in the shade for an hour 
will help decrease your chances of getting sunburnt 
or sunstroke.
 
Bring lip salve with you—you don’t want your lips 
burning either!


--- Page 104 ---
104
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 reCogniZing 
 
Heat ExhauStion 
And sUnstrOke 
Sunstroke or heatstroke is caused by the body 
overheating and being unable to bring down its 
core temperature to normal. It is usually preceded 
by heat exhaustion. Both can be prevented by 
staying hydrated, resting in the shade during 
the hottest part of the day, and limiting your 
exposure to the sun. Signs and symptoms of both 
conditions are as follows:


--- Page 105 ---
105
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
Heat exhaustion
 
Feeling tired 
and weak
 
Muscle aches
 
Feeling nauseous or 
being sick
 
Clammy skin
 
Heavy sweating
 
Headache
 
Diarrhea
 
Feeling confused, 
dizzy, lightheaded, 
or faint
 
Dark urine
Sunstroke
 
Hot skin to touch
 
Muscle cramps
 
Headache
 
Quick pulse
 
Core temperature 
104°F or higher
 
Sluggish
 
Experiencing 
slurred speech, 
disorientation, 
agitation, 
hallucinations, 
or convulsions
 
Loss of consciousness


--- Page 106 ---
106
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 trEatinG heaT 
ExhauStion and 
SunstRoke
If you think the sufferer has heat exhaustion, 
make sure they have loosened or removed their 
clothes and sponge their body with cold water, 
or use wet towels. Keep them cool by fanning 
them and get them to drink something salty 
(a teaspoon of salt in a quart of water) to help 
replenish salt levels in their body and rehydrate 
them. If you think they have sunstroke, call an 
ambulance or take them to the nearest hospital 
immediately. While you are waiting, follow the 
steps above. 


--- Page 107 ---
107
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
gaMes tO play 
ArounD the campFire
In this section you’ll find a variety of games to 
play, from using cards to pen and paper, ranging 
from those that are child-friendly to those that 
involve drinking.


--- Page 108 ---
108
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 crAzy eIghts 
Type of game: 
Child-friendly
What you will need: 
2–7 players 
A deck of cards for 5 or fewer players; 2 decks of
cards for more than 5 players
How to play:
Each player starts with eight cards, or seven if 
there are only two players. Place the remaining 
cards in a stack facedown in the middle of the 
table. The top card is turned over, and play starts 
as the player to the dealer’s left discards a card 
from their hand that is the same suit or same 
number as the previous card that was dealt. Play 
continues in this way, with the aim being to be 
the first person to get rid of all their cards. If a 
player can’t go but they have a card bearing the 


--- Page 109 ---
109
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
number eight, they can use this and announce 
a suit that the next player must put down. If the 
next player doesn’t have any of these cards, they 
must pick one up from the face-down deck. Once 
a player has got rid of all their cards, the other 
players must add up their scores. Eights score 
50, face cards score ten, and the other cards 
are scored at face value. These points are then 
passed to the winner. The overall winner is the 
person to score a total that is decided before the 
game—usually this is 100 points for two players, 
150 points for three, 200 for four, 250 for five, 
300 for six, and 350 for seven.


--- Page 110 ---
110
A PLAYFUL PATH 
is the ShoRtest 
road to happiness.
  Bernie DeKoven  


--- Page 111 ---
111
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 G’dAy, brucE 
Type of game:
Child-friendly
What you will need: 
A group of people (the more people, the better)
How to play:
Players sit in a circle and everyone starts with the 
name Bruce. Play follows like so:
Player one turns to their left and says “G’day, 
Bruce.”
This player (player two) returns the hello with 
another “G’day, Bruce.”
Player one then gestures to player three (the 
person to the left of player two) and says “Say 
g’day to Bruce, Bruce.”
Player two turns to player three and the game 
begins again around the circle, with player two 
saying “G’day, Bruce.”


--- Page 112 ---
112
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
If a player makes a mistake or if they hesitate 
for too long, their name changes and play starts 
again beginning with them. For the first mistake, 
their name changes to Sheila, then on their 
second mistake they become Harold, then Kylie, 
then Jason, then Lou, then Madge, and by the 
seventh mistake that player is out of the game.
For example, if player one makes a mistake 
then play would continue like so:
Player one turns to their left and says “G’day, 
Bruce.”
Player two returns the hello with “G’day, 
Sheila.”
Player one then gestures to player three and 
says “Say g’day to Bruce, Bruce.”


--- Page 113 ---
113
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 douSe! 
Type of game:
Child-friendly
What you will need: 
A group of players 
Small cup 
Water 
Paper 
Pen
How to play:
Players sit in a circle and someone is nominated 
to be the douser. The douser calls out a category, 
such as “cars,” and writes down an example 
that they must not tell anyone else. The person 
to their left must think of an example in the 
category, such as “BMW,” and say it aloud. As 
this is happening, the douser holds a small cup 
with water in it over the person’s head. If they say 


--- Page 114 ---
114
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
a different example from the douser’s, then they 
are safe and play continues. If they say the same 
word the douser has written down, the douser 
must show their answer and tip the water over 
the player’s head. That player then becomes the 
douser.


--- Page 115 ---
115
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 maU maU 
Type of game:
Child-friendly
What you will need:
A deck of cards 
2–6 players
How to play:
After choosing who goes first, players are dealt 
five cards each and the rest of the cards are 
placed face down in a stack. Play begins with the 
top card of the facedown deck being turned over 
and placed by the side of it, creating a discard 
pile. The aim of the game is to get rid of all your 
cards first, and players take it in turns, going 
counterclockwise, to place a card on the discard 
pile. This card must be either the same number 
or suit as the last card that was placed on the 
pile. If you can’t go, you have to draw a card 


--- Page 116 ---
116
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
from the unused deck. Special cards change the 
play of the game, for example:
Jack—changes the suit. A jack can’t be followed 
by another jack.
9—reverses the direction of play. For two 
players, play another card.
8—skips a turn.
7—the next player picks up two cards. If 
they’re able to play a 7, the number of cards 
the following player has to pick up is doubled to 
four. If the following player also has a 7, then the 
next player must pick up eight cards.
Once you’ve discarded your second-to-last 
card, you must say “Mau.” You must say “Mau 
Mau” before discarding your last card, otherwise 
you have to pick up a card.


--- Page 117 ---
117
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 trAvel thE worlD 
Type of game:
Drinking, but can also be played without alcohol 
What you will need: 
A group of people
How to play:
Players sit in a circle and someone calls out a 
country beginning with “T.” The person to their 
left then calls out a country beginning with “R.” 
Play continues and the aim of the game is to spell 
“travel the world” by saying countries’ names 
that begin with the relevant letter. If someone 
hesitates, they must drink two sips (or they just 
lose, if playing the non-drinking version) and 
the game restarts with the person to their left. 
Country names cannot be repeated in a round.


--- Page 118 ---
118
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 capS 
 
Type of game:
Drinking
What you will need: 
2 players 
Beer bottles 
Beer bottle caps 
How to play:
Two players sit apart from each other, each with 
a beer bottle and the bottle’s cap placed upside 
down on top of it in front of them. Players take 
it in turns to knock the cap off their opponent’s 
beer bottle by throwing spare bottle caps. (If you 
don’t have any spare, it means you haven’t drunk 
enough.) Fail, and it’s the other player’s turn; 
win, and the other player gets a chance to have 
another go at hitting your cap off. If they’re not 
successful, they must down half of their drink. If 
they do win the challenge, then you must keep 
playing until someone fails.


--- Page 119 ---
119
SOMETIMES A FIRE 
BuiLt on a Hill
will bring interested people
TO YOUR CAMPFIRE.
  Shannon L. Alder  


--- Page 120 ---
120
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
natuRe’S wonDers—
What To loOk ouT for
This short guide can be used for campers keen 
to spot some wildlife. Just remember that the 
animals you spot are wild—do not approach 
them!


--- Page 121 ---
121
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 trAcks anD signS 
 
If you know what you’re looking for, there are 
signs of wildlife everywhere—the soft mud near 
rivers and in woods is perfect for spotting animal 
tracks. Here are some things to watch out for 
while you’re camping: 
 
A paw print with five toes could be an otter or a 
badger. If there’s a large pad behind the toe pads, 
it’s probably a badger. 
 
A paw print with four toes could belong to a fox or 
a dog. Look at the size of the rear pad—foxes have 
rear pads that are the same size as their toe pads, 
whereas a dog’s rear pad is larger. 


--- Page 122 ---
122
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 
Deer tracks are easily identifiable by the two 
sausage-shaped slots made by their hooves.
Aside from tracks, look out for burrows near the 
water’s edge, often with a patch of nibbled grass 
around the entrance, and piles of grass and 
stems with diagonal cuts at the end—these are 
all signs of water voles. Rats dig similar holes to 
water voles but they often have a heap of soil 
outside the entrance and the holes are connected 
by well-trampled paths. It’s rare to see an otter, 
but you might see their droppings (or spraints)—
these are approximately 3/4 to 2 1/2 inches long 
and contain fish bones and scales. 


--- Page 123 ---
123
OUR TASK MUST BE TO 
free ourselves from this 
PriSon by WidEning our
circle of compassion to
EMBRACE ALL LIVING
creatures and the whole of 
NatUre in its BeaUtY.
  Albert Einstein  


--- Page 124 ---
124
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
caMping hackS
Whether you’re prone to tripping on your tent’s 
ropes and are looking for a way to stop this or 
you’re lost and need to find out quickly which way 
is north, this section contains the best camping 
cheats around.


--- Page 125 ---
125
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 duCt tapE 
To thE rescuE
Arm yourself with a roll of duct tape. If you wake 
up in the morning to a collapsing tent, you can 
easily fix any broken poles by wrapping up the 
damaged parts with the strong stuff. It’s also 
great for patching up practically anything, from 
holey backpacks or clothes to broken handles on 
saucepans and leaky water bottles.


--- Page 126 ---
126
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 hyGieniC hydRatioN 
Clean water is essential to life in any situation. 
If you’re in a remote location and find yourself 
without it, you’re in trouble. Presuming you can 
source water while you’re camping, here’s how 
to ensure it’s drinkable.
The easiest way is to always carry water-
purifying tablets—adding these to your H2O will 
ensure it’s safe. You can even stock up on water-
purifying straws, which have the same effect. 
Boiling your water or using a water-purifying 
bottle are other ways to quench your thirst safely.


--- Page 127 ---
127
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 daYlighT meaSure 
Imagine you’re out walking—it’s getting late and 
you’re worried that you might not make it back 
to camp before dark. Put your mind at ease (or 
not) by estimating the amount of daylight left 
using nothing other than your bare hand.
Hold your arm parallel to the horizon with your 
fingers straight and your thumb tucked in. Line 
up your index finger with the bottom of the sun 
and count how many finger widths there are 
between the sun and the horizon. Each finger 
equals roughly 15 minutes of daylight. If there 
are 5 minutes of daylight left, start running! 
Note: this only works if you are in the
mid latitudes. 


--- Page 128 ---
128
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 fiNding nortH 
At nighT
If you’re out in the wild and need to find your 
way without a compass, there’s a simple 
method. (But let’s just take a minute here to say 
that you should never embark on an unguided 
trip without a map and a compass!) Presuming 
you don’t have any other options left, you can 
navigate by finding the North Star (Polaris)—as 
long as you’re in the northern hemisphere.  
First, you need to locate the Big Dipper, also 
known in the UK as the Plough, possibly the 
best-known constellation—if you don’t know it 
already, you should definitely learn it. At the end 
of the Plough that’s furthest from its “handle” you 
should be able to pick out the top-most star, on 
the top “lip” of the Big Dipper. From this point, 
extend your gaze in a straight line (away from the 
bottom of the Big Dipper) until you see a distinctly 
bright star. This is Polaris, your north point. 


--- Page 129 ---
129
ThoSe who ConTeMplAte
the beauty of the earth 
FIND RESERVES OF 
StrEngth That Will
endure as long 
AS LIFE LASTS. 
  Rachel Carson  


--- Page 130 ---
130
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 ticK 
RepelLent Spray
Ticks can’t hop, jump, fly, swim, or make noises—
but they do have one hell of a grip when they 
bite, and once they have a hold on you they’re 
nasty to remove. However, you won’t even need 
to think about removing them when you use this 
tick-repellent hack to stop ticks coming near you 
in the first place.
Put one part tea tree oil and two parts water 
into a spray bottle. Spray the mixture on to your 
clothes, shoes, and tent to create a force field 
against the ticks.


--- Page 131 ---
131
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 taPe traiL 
Even seasoned hikers lose their way from time 
to time. If your travels have taken you into dense 
forest or woodland, finding your campground 
again can prove tricky, especially at night. You 
can take the stress out of the situation with this 
simple hack.
Invest in some brightly colored biodegradable 
tape, which you can use to mark out a key route 
through difficult environs. Leave small tabs in 
easy-to-spot places, or if you’re really in the 
thick of it, and you’re not going very far, run a 
longer stretch of tape out at waist height.


--- Page 132 ---
132
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 boTtle Boost 
Hydration is key when you’re hiking. Investing 
in a sturdy, stainless steel water bottle is a great 
idea—they are less prone to cracking than 
plastic ones and contain no potentially harmful 
chemicals, and the double-skinned ones will 
maintain the temperature of the liquid inside for 
longer. Furthermore, you can give your bottle a 
boost and make it even better with this hack.
Wrapping your bottle in duct tape will increase 
its temperature-holding potential. In cold 
weather, it will also protect your fingers from a 
chill when holding the bottle. So it’s a win-win!


--- Page 133 ---
133
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 foR-the-win 
 
RainbOots
If you’ve forgotten your rain boots and your 
only footwear consists of soft fabric that absorbs 
water far too quickly, you may feel like your 
camping holiday is doomed if the rain doesn’t 
stay away. However, all is not lost with these 
makeshift wellies. 
What you need: 
4–6 plastic bags (without holes)
Duct tape
A small pair of scissors
How to make them:
1. With your shoes on, wrap a plastic bag around each 
foot and tie the handles firmly in a knot, though not 
so tight that you cut off your circulation.


--- Page 134 ---
134
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
2. With the scissors, in two more plastic bags, make 
holes that are big enough to slide your feet through. 
Put them around each leg so that they slightly 
overlap the other bags and tie the handles in a knot 
to secure them around your legs. Depending on 
how tall you are, you may have to repeat this step 
further up your calves.
3. Now here comes the duct tape—the more colorful 
and patterned it is, the better. Wind the duct tape 
round each leg, starting at your toes and finishing 
where the plastic bags meet your flesh or clothes. 
Remember to circle the duct tape two to three 
times where the two plastic bags meet and where 
the makeshift rain boot ends for extra waterproof 
protection.
4. Now you can do whatever you had planned without 
the weather stopping you.


--- Page 135 ---
135
THE STARS ARE 
Like the TreEs 
in the forest, 
AliVe and BreAtHing.
  Haruki Murakami  


--- Page 136 ---
136
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 stRike Me luckY 
Taking matches on a camping trip is pretty 
essential for all sorts of miscellaneous situations. 
However, the strike pads on “strike anywhere” 
matchboxes can be a bit temperamental. To 
ensure you don’t have to do the rounds of your 
campground neighbors, asking if you can borrow 
their strike pads, also take a strip of sandpaper—
or a nail file, if you want your luggage to be as 
multifunctional as possible!


--- Page 137 ---
137
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 boTtle IllumInatoR 
Tired of holding a flashlight or your phone 
whenever you try to find something at night? 
Remember to pack a large water bottle and 
a headlamp with an elastic strap/headband. 
When it gets dark, secure the headlamp to the 
water bottle using its strap, so the light is facing 
inwards, and voilà—you have your very own 
free-standing lamp that illuminates the whole 
tent or area, not just wherever you’re facing.


--- Page 138 ---
138
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 teNt-ropE 
IdentIfier
When it’s dark, even if you’re cleverly equipped 
with a flashlight, it’s often difficult to see your 
tent—let alone the tent’s ropes, which seem to 
be there for the sole reason of tripping you up. 
This hack will help to reduce your chances of 
an accident, as well as enabling you to find that 
elusive tent entrance more easily. For each tent 
rope, take a swim noodle and cut it to the length 
of the rope—a brightly colored one will make 
your tent easier to identify. With a penknife, 
make a vertical slit down one side and into the 
middle of the swim noodle. Once you’ve pitched 
your tent, latch the foam pieces around the 
ropes. If you want extra visibility, decorate the 
pool noodles with glow-in-the-dark paint.


--- Page 139 ---
139
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 emErgencY 
CrayonS
A steady source of light is key when you’re hiking 
or camping. You may need to shed light on 
various activities away from your campfire and 
in the absence of a flashlight (or one that has a 
working battery!) you can use this hack.
Wax crayons with paper casing are good for 
coloring and great for burning in a candle-like 
fashion when there are no other light sources to 
hand. You can get up to half an hour from a lit 
crayon. Just don’t use your favorite color or your 
artwork will suffer!


--- Page 140 ---
140
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 geT busY 
 
With BeeswaX
If you’re keen on protecting the environment as 
well as staying dry while out walking, this one is 
for you. Waterproofing your gear is an essential 
precaution for any trek. However, most spray-
on proofers are made up of various synthetic 
chemicals—if you’d prefer to avoid these, use 
this natural alternative.
Beeswax features in many proofing products, 
but used in its pure form, it does a similar job 
without having been heavily processed. It can 
be rubbed directly on to garments, bags, and 
shoes—just expect them to be a little waxy and 
pleasantly fragrant as a result.


--- Page 141 ---
141
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 drY bootS 
Whether your hiking boots are wet from working 
up a sweat or from trudging through huge 
puddles or a rainstorm, you’ll want to let them 
dry as soon as you have the chance. Here’s a 
hack to help you do just that.
Ball up some newspaper and stuff it (not too 
tightly!) into your wet boots. The paper will 
absorb the moisture and dry your boots out 
much quicker than heat alone would. If you’ve 
finished walking for the day, replace the paper 
after a couple of hours.


--- Page 142 ---
142
NATURE IS NOT 
a place to visit. 
it is Home.
  Gary Snyder  


--- Page 143 ---
143
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 waSh and Go! 
If you’re camping or on an extended walk and 
you’ve fallen in something brown and sticky (no, 
not a stick) but you’re also miles away from a 
washing machine, you can use this hack.
Pack a large, durable ziplock bag. Stuff the 
soiled garment into the bag along with a small 
pinch or drop of laundry detergent, or some 
“pocket soap” (which you can buy from outdoor 
stores). Add water (hot or cold)—you might 
have to beg for water at a local residence if you 
don’t have any to spare from your bottle. Mix 
everything well using your hands for 5 minutes, 
before sealing the bag and leaving to soak for 
10 minutes. Then squeeze as much water out 
as possible before rinsing with clean water and 
squeezing again. Dry the garment on an elastic 
travel washing line or hang it up on a branch. If 
using this hack while hiking or outdoors, make 
sure you use 100 percent biodegradable soap.


--- Page 144 ---
144
THE CAMPER’S SURVIVAL GUIDE
 suPerchArged 
SleepIng baG
If a cold night is in the cards, your sleeping bag 
needs to be up to the job. If you’re concerned it 
might not be (or perhaps you can’t afford a new 
one), consider this hack to boost your night-
time comfort.
Those heat reflectors that sensible people 
put in their car windows to reflect the sun are 
naturally good at reflecting heat, so by slipping 
one (or two) into your sleeping bag, you’ll create 
a layer of heat-reflecting insulation. You’ll be as 
toasty as a turkey in tinfoil at 350°F.


--- Page 145 ---
145
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
 fiRe stArter 
There’s nothing better than having a BBQ with 
your friends or family on your first evening 
under the stars. But if there isn’t an experienced 
fire starter among you, you could be starved 
of the sausages that are waiting to be cooked. 
Thankfully, that’s where this hack comes in useful.
Instead of taking a big bag of charcoal with 
you, pack each piece of charcoal individually in 
the compartments of a 12 or 18-hole cardboard 
egg carton. Not only will this save you from 
lugging a heavy bag of charcoal round, but the 
egg box also acts as an easy-to-start fire pack. All 
you have to do is light the egg carton and the fire 
will catch on to the charcoal. Happy barbecuing, 
and make sure you roast some Starburst candies 
for dessert—delicious!


--- Page 146 ---
146
NATURE IS 
ImaGiNatIoN 
ITSELF. 
  William Blake  
I


--- Page 147 ---
147
WHILE YOU ARE AWAY 
haPpy cAmping!
Hopefully this little book has given you some 
insight into what to expect when you’re camping 
and you’ll be more prepared if you encounter any 
hiccups along the way. Embrace the peace and 
quiet of nature, and partake in plenty of outdoor 
activities to make your camping experience one 
you’ll never forget. 
Stay safe, be spontaneous and, most importantly 
of all, have fun!


--- Page 148 ---
If you’re interested in finding out more about 
our books, find us at:
www.skyhorsepublishing.com
imAge cRedits
p.3—icons © ctrlaplus/Shutterstock.com 
pp.13, 18, 19, 24, 48, 60, 64, 84—icons © ctrlaplus/Shutterstock.com 
pp.16 and 17—icons © vladwel/Shutterstock.com 
p.34—top tent © dimoxa1100/Shutterstock.com, bottom tent 
© Ksenica/Shutterstock.com 
p.35—icons © aliaksei kruhlenia/Shutterstock.com 
p.43—sleeping bags © Yana Alisovna/Shutterstock.com 
p.54—icons © aliaksei kruhlenia/Shutterstock.com 
p.59—clothes © SaveJungle/Shutterstock.com 
p.63—icons © robuart/Shutterstock.com 
p.68—icon © BARS graphics/Shutterstock.com 
p.75—icons © graphixmania/Shutterstock.com 
p.82—icons © GoodStudio/Shutterstock.com 
pp.109, 112, 114, 116—icons © 
Alexander Ryabintsev/Shutterstock.com


--- Page 149 ---


--- Page 150 ---


--- Page 151 ---


--- Page 152 ---
